Trying once more to revise the Book of Mormon—this time for the kids

1. Intro— story about interactions with Brittany.
>Have been aware of the need for an update to the language for some time. (Now finally aware of []'s work with Easy-to-Read Book of Mormon.)
>Things came to a head when in April we decided that our oldest son probably needed something more than the Church's Book of Mormon Stories for Children. But switching to the good old Book of Mormon proved to be almost too much for both of us. 

I have tried many times before to find a complete and unabridged Book of Mormon for children that is something akin to the wonderful International Children's Bible. I usually end up on Deseret Book's website, vainly scrolling through the offerings and wishing that someone would do it differently. This time, however, I was afraid that we would simply end up not reading the scriptures at all.

Why? We felt a constant compulsion to explain to our kids the seemingly neverending ways in which the Book of Mormon is male-centric: "This is how people thought back then." "When it says 'he' it means 'anyone.'" "Sarah and Rebekah and Rachel were also probably resurrected, not just Abraham, Isaac and Jacob." So on and so on. We could only engage in this exercise for so long (a few nights, as it turned out) before it was clear that it was not going to work for our family. 

Look at the last (to my knowledge) pronouncement in a church organ on the matter, which is this 1993 Ensign article. Or perhaps look at pronouncements by self-reported scriptorians on Quora[3]. From these, you can see that translation of Latter-day scripture is not the domain of non-prophets.

"So are you essentially just rewriting the Book of Mormon, replacing words like 'mankind' with 'humankind'?" Sort of. I personally view the undertaking as much more expansive than that. I am also trying to pull the vocabulary and overall structure of the prose down (or in some instances, up) to third- to fifth-grade English. This is often not too grotesque a task. For example, get out a pen and a piece of paper, and try your hand at modernizing this passage:

[]

Here's my take:

       Sariah and Lehi […]

Sometimes, however, it feels more like rearranging a Scrabble board into something coherent:

	   []

Here's my take on that doozy of a passage:

       []

Do I think that my take is in some sense more correct? No, I don't. (How do you improve on "the most correct of any book on earth"?) In fact, I wish that we had access to a range of translations of the Book of Mormon, just as we do with the Bible. But I do think that what I have written is much easier for children---and adults---to understand. 

###########NONO I call my effort quasi-scholarly because I spend a lot of time on merriam-webster.com, BibleGateway, and Bible Hub to get a feel for how phrases used in the Book of Mormon

This brings me to the heart of the ICBoM project. I imagine that the intent behind translating any scripture is to bring the message of God's word to a wider audience. That is certainly my intention. I have two primary and equally important goals: (a) Eliminate the outsize male bias in the Book of Mormon as much as I can while staying true, in some to-be-defined-shortly sense, to the original text. (b) Make it possible for kids who are 8+ to pick up a copy of the Book of Mormon, and be able to read \textit{and understand} it on their own. 

As for "staying true to the original text," I'll illustrate what I mean by way of examples: While I do not feel at liberty, for example, to change Nephi's name to Nephiette, I do feel at liberty to change "Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob" to "Sarah and Abraham, and Rebekah and Isaac, and Rachel and Jacob." I do feel at liberty to make "kings"

This is, of course, an exercise in degrees.

As the adage and its variants go, "All stories are true; some of them even happened."

I also naturally have a number of, shall we say, sub-priorities, not necessarily in order of importance: (c) make the ICBoM as widely and as freely available as possible; (d) reinforce the idea that what matters about scripture is \textit{not} the exact words themselves, but the ideas they convey; (e) be the proverbial change that I want to see in the world.

Why these two goals? As Lynn Hunt has said,[5] "Presentism, at its worst, encourages a kind of moral complacency and self-congratulation." 

I'll even risk a prediction: We ultimately must move away from patriarchy and our white-male-opinions-are-normative worldview. If we do, we will find more and more people interested in our message of the (ongoing and as-of-yet incomplete) Restoration; we will save our sisters, brothers, nieces, nephews, daughters, and sons from otherwise inevitable cognitive dissonance. 

What dissonance? The dissonance that is on display when we say that LDS women are incredible, valued, needed, etc., but show in our policies (e.g., no female missionary leaders over male missionaries; I am male and so can be sealed to multiple women, but you are female and so cannot) and even our beliefs (e.g., D&C 132) that what it's really about is male leadership, male voices, male inspiration, male officiation, male prophets, male priesthood, and for-males-by-males scriptures.

While I cannot comment on church membership generally, I can comment on church membership in the United States and Europe. This cognitive dissonance is among the factors[4] that make today's rising generation feel unwelcome and out of place. And I personally believe that it is unreasonable to expect our children and other family members to want to live in and raise their own children in these environments where the cards are stacked against women by design. The sexism currently comes in two flavors: thinly veiled and barefaced.

So where does the International Children's Book of Mormon fall on the spectrum?

Is the International Children's Book of Mormon the answer? I would say no. Some others would say that the master's tools will never dismantle the master's house---a point that I grapple with regularly. But I believe that a translation of the Book of Mormon that tries to move away from the sexism that has accompanied our church and our societies for centuries is among the many critical steps, even while basically failing in the attempt.








(A Navajo friend of mine recently had this to say—whether it was his own statement or someone else's, I know not: "No one in the Bible was white. Take all the time you need with that.")

Started using ICB seriously during last year's Come, Follow Me readings in the New Testament. We fell in love with the way that it linguistically (if not always conceptually) simplifies the message of the Bible. Gender equality and gender balance is a regular topic in our home, so we also liked encountering examples of inclusive language in the ICB.

Realizing that a Book of Mormon "answer" to the ICB does not exist, we were immediately faced with a problem. The Church's own "[name of kid BoM]" skips enormous portions of the Book of Mormon. Other versions [show here] are not free, and the one previous attempt of which we are aware to bring inclusive language into the Book of Mormon ["Easy-to-read BoM]" is hard to come by and totally not a feasible option for most people [$$ on eBay].

So where to go? Tough as it is to say—who wants to sound like they are speaking against the "cornerstone" of their own religion?—my wife and I have a hard time reading the Book of Mormon. We found ourselves wondering, "Why didn't we have this issue with the New Testament?" The obvious answer is that the approach that has been taken to Bible translation in the past few decades is much more liberal.

On degree of male-centricness, The Book of Mormon is bested only by the Doctrine and Covenants.[1][2]

I recognize that the Bible and the Book of Mormon are both shining examples of patriarchy, no matter how inclusive you make the language. I am of the persuasion that Jesus Christ, Christianity, and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are all worth sticking with, and that the Church and Christianity can and will, with time, move toward inclusivity and real equality in more than just words.

https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/ensign/1993/04/news-of-the-church/modern-language-editions-of-the-book-of-mormon-discouraged?lang=eng


[1] This is a minor point, but it is objectively demonstrable that the International Children's Book of Mormon is a more carefully done job in terms of conveying the message of the Book of Mormon than, say, Timothy B. Wilson's "Plain English" version (https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Book_of_Mormon_(Plain_English_Version)/1_Nephi/Chapter_5). (No offense, Timothy!)

His: "Help those who need your help, and give your substance to those who need it. Do not turn away those who ask for your help, saying, 'This foolish man has brought on his own misery. I will not relieve his misery by giving him food or money. He deserves to suffer for his own mistakes.' Anyone who does this has great need to repent. Otherwise, he or she will spiritually perish forever, having no place in God's kingdom. For we're all beggars! We all depend upon the same Being, even God, for everything we have....food, clothing and all our prosperity."

Mine: "You might say to yourself, \lq It is that beggar's own fault that she is suffering. I am not going to give her my food or any of my things to keep her from suffering, because this is her rightful punishment.\rq But the person who says this needs to repent. If that person does not repent, they have no interest in the kingdom of God, and they will die forever. Listen, are not we all beggars? Do not we all depend upon God for everything that we have---for food and clothing, and for gold and silver, and for all the good things that we have?"


[3] https://www.quora.com/Why-dont-the-Latter-Day-Saints-produce-a-modern-English-translation-of-the-Book-of-Mormon

[4] Janet Riess's "The Next Mormons"

[5] https://www.historians.org/publications-and-directories/perspectives-on-history/may-2002/against-presentism
