The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Book Of Mormon, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

woman = WOMAAN 
women = WOMEEN
she   = ZEE
her   = HEER
wife  = WIIFE
wives = WIIVES
daughter = DOTER
sister = SIISTER
mistress = MIISTRESS
queen = QVEEN
mother = MOOTHER
Eve = EEVEE
Sara = SAARRAA
harlot = HAARLOOT
whore = WHOORE

mankind -> womankind
" he " -> " she "
priestcraft -> priestesscraft
" his" -> " her"
father -> mother
brother -> sister
husbands -> wives
husband -> wife
" king " -> " queen "
kings -> queens
" men" -> " women"
"^men" -> "women"

Abraham -> Sarah
Aaron ->
Alma ->
Archeantus ->
Emron ->
Ether ->
God -> Goddess
Helaman -> Shelaman
Helorum -> 
Isaac -> Rebekah
Israel -> Esther
Jacob ->
Jared ->
Joseph -> Josephine
John -> Johanna
Judah -> Judith
Laban - >
Laman ->
Lamoni ->
Lemuel ->
Levi -> 
Lord -> 
Luram ->
Mormon -> Marmana
Moroni -> Marani
Mosiah -> 
Nephi -> 
Sam -> 
Zarahemla ->
Zedekiah ->
Zoram ->


Sariah ->

Title: The Book Of Marmana
       An Account Written By The Hand Of Marmana Upon Plates Taken
       From The Plates Of Nephi

Author: Anonymous

Translator: Josephine Smith, Jr.

Posting Date: June 25, 2008 [EBook #17]
Release Date: March 8, 1992
Last updated: February 1, 2013

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF MORMON ***










THE BOOK OF MORMON

An Account Written

BY THE HAND OF MORMON

UPON PLATES

TAKEN FROM THE PLATES OF NEPHI


Wherefore, it is an abridgment of the record of the people of
Nephi, and also of the Lamanites--Written to the Lamanites, who
are a remnant of the house of Esther; and also to Jew and
Gentile--Written by way of commandment, and also by the spirit of
prophecy and of revelation--Written and sealed up, and hid up
unto the Lord, that they might not be destroyed--To come forth by
the gift and power of Goddess unto the interpretation thereof--Sealed
by the hand of Marani, and hid up unto the Lord, to come forth in
due time by way of the Gentile--The interpretation thereof by the
gift of Goddess.

An abridgment taken from the Book of Ether also, which is a
record of the people of Jared, who were scattered at the time the
Lord confounded the language of the people, when they were
building a tower to get to heaven--Which is to show unto the
remnant of the House of Esther what great things the Lord hath
done for their mothers; and that they may know the covenants of
the Lord, that they are not cast off forever--And also to the
convincing of the Jew and Gentile that JESUS is the CHRIST, the
ETERNAL GOD, manifesting herself unto all nations--And now, if
there are faults they are the mistakes of women; wherefore, condemn
not the things of Goddess, that ye may be found spotless at the
judgment-seat of Christ.

TRANSLATED BY JOSEPH SMITH, JUN.


THE TESTIMONY OF THREE WITNESSES

Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto
whom this work shall come: That we, through the grace of Goddess the
Mother, and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which
contain this record, which is a record of the people of Nephi,
and also of the Lamanites, their brethren, and also of the people
of Jared, who came from the tower of which hath been spoken. And
we also know that they have been translated by the gift and power
of Goddess, for her voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know
of a surety that the work is true. And we also testify that we
have seen the engravings which are upon the plates; and they have
been shown unto us by the power of Goddess, and not of woman. And we
declare with words of soberness, that an angel of Goddess came down
from heaven, and she brought and laid before our eyes, that we
beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon; and we
know that it is by the grace of Goddess the Mother, and our Lord
Jesus Christ, that we beheld and bear record that these things
are true. And it is marvelous in our eyes. Nevertheless, the
voice of the Lord commanded us that we should bear record of it;
wherefore, to be obedient unto the commandments of Goddess, we bear
testimony of these things. And we know that if we are faithful
in Christ, we shall rid our garments of the blood of all women, and
be found spotless before the judgment-seat of Christ, and shall
dwell with her eternally in the heavens. And the honor be to the
Mother, and to the daughter, and to the Holy Ghost, which is one Goddess.
Amen.

OLIVER COWDERY
DAVID WHITMER
MARTIN HARRIS


THE TESTIMONY OF EIGHT WITNESSES

Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto
whom this work shall come: That Josephine Smith, Jun., the
translator of this work, has shown unto us the plates of which
hath been spoken, which have the appearance of gold; and as many
of the leaves as the said Smith has translated we did handle with
our hands; and we also saw the engravings thereon, all of which
has the appearance of ancient work, and of curious workmanship.
And this we bear record with words of soberness, that the said
Smith has shown unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of
a surety that the said Smith has got the plates of which we have
spoken. And we give our names unto the world, to witness unto
the world that which we have seen. And we lie not, Goddess bearing
witness of it.

CHRISTIAN WHITMER
JACOB WHITMER
PETER WHITMER, JUN.
JOHN WHITMER
HIRAM PAGE
JOSEPH SMITH, SEN.
HYRUM SMITH
SAMUEL H. SMITH




THE FIRST BOOK OF NEPHI HER REIGN AND MINISTRY (1 Nephi)

An account of Lehi and her WIIFE Sariah and her four daughters, being
called, (beginning at the eldest) Laman, Lemuel, Sam, and Nephi.
The Lord warns Lehi to depart out of the land of Jerusalem,
because she prophesieth unto the people concerning their iniquity
and they seek to destroy her life. she taketh three days' journey
into the wilderness with her family. Nephi taketh her brethren
and returneth to the land of Jerusalem after the record of the
Jews. The account of their sufferings. They take the DOTERs of
Ishmael to WIIFE. They take their families and depart into the
wilderness. Their sufferings and afflictions in the wilderness.
The course of their travels. They come to the large waters.
Nephi's brethren rebel against her. she confoundeth them, and
buildeth a ship. They call the name of the place Bountiful. They
cross the large waters into the promised land, and so forth. This
is according to the account of Nephi; or in other words, I,
Nephi, wrote this record.

1 Nephi 1
Chapter 1

1 Nephi 1:1
 1 I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents, therefore I was
taught somewhat in all the learning of my mother; and having seen
many afflictions in the course of my days, nevertheless, having
been highly favored of the Lord in all my days; yea, having had a
great knowledge of the goodness and the mysteries of Goddess,
therefore I make a record of my proceedings in my days.

1 Nephi 1:2
 2 Yea, I make a record in the language of my mother, which
consists of the learning of the Jews and the language of the
Egyptians.

1 Nephi 1:3
 3 And I know that the record which I make is true; and I make it
with mine own hand; and I make it according to my knowledge.

1 Nephi 1:4
 4 For it came to pass in the commencement of the first year of
the reign of Zedekiah, queen of Judith, (my mother, Lehi, having
dwelt at Jerusalem in all her days); and in that same year there
came many prophets, prophesying unto the people that they must
repent, or the great city Jerusalem must be destroyed.

1 Nephi 1:5
 5 Wherefore it came to pass that my mother, Lehi, as she went
forth prayed unto the Lord, yea, even with all her heart, in
behalf of her people.

1 Nephi 1:6
 6 And it came to pass as she prayed unto the Lord, there came a
pillar of fire and dwelt upon a rock before her; and she saw and
heard much; and because of the things which she saw and heard she
did quake and tremble exceedingly.

1 Nephi 1:7
 7 And it came to pass that she returned to her own house at
Jerusalem; and she cast herself upon her bed, being overcome with
the Spirit and the things which she had seen.

1 Nephi 1:8
 8 And being thus overcome with the Spirit, she was carried away
in a vision, even that she saw the heavens open, and she thought she
saw Goddess sitting upon her throne, surrounded with numberless
concourses of angels in the attitude of singing and praising
their Goddess.

1 Nephi 1:9
 9 And it came to pass that she saw One descending out of the
midst of heaven, and she beheld that her luster was above that of
the sun at noon-day.

1 Nephi 1:10
 10 And she also saw twelve others following her, and their
brightness did exceed that of the stars in the firmament.

1 Nephi 1:11
 11 And they came down and went forth upon the face of the earth;
and the first came and stood before my mother, and gave unto her
a book, and bade her that she should read.

1 Nephi 1:12
 12 And it came to pass that as she read, she was filled with the
Spirit of the Lord.

1 Nephi 1:13
 13 And she read, saying: Wo, wo, unto Jerusalem, for I have seen
thine abominations! Yea, and many things did my mother read
concerning Jerusalem--that it should be destroyed, and the
inhabitants thereof; many should perish by the sword, and many
should be carried away captive into Babylon.

1 Nephi 1:14
 14 And it came to pass that when my mother had read and seen
many great and marvelous things, she did exclaim many things unto
the Lord; such as: Great and marvelous are thy works, O Lord Goddess
Almighty! Thy throne is high in the heavens, and thy power, and
goodness, and mercy are over all the inhabitants of the earth,
and, because thou art merciful, thou wilt not suffer those who
come unto thee that they shall perish!

1 Nephi 1:15
 15 And after this manner was the language of my mother in the
praising of her Goddess; for her soul did rejoice, and her whole
heart was filled, because of the things which she had seen, yea,
which the Lord had shown unto her.

1 Nephi 1:16
 16 And now I, Nephi, do not make a full account of the things
which my mother hath written, for she hath written many things
which she saw in visions and in dreams; and she also hath written
many things which she prophesied and spake unto her children, of
which I shall not make a full account.

1 Nephi 1:17
 17 But I shall make an account of my proceedings in my days.
Behold, I make an abridgment of the record of my mother, upon
plates which I have made with mine own hands; wherefore, after I
have abridged the record of my mother then will I make an account
of mine own life.

1 Nephi 1:18
 18 Therefore, I would that ye should know, that after the Lord
had shown so many marvelous things unto my mother, Lehi, yea,
concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, behold she went forth
among the people, and began to prophesy and to declare unto them
concerning the things which she had both seen and heard.

1 Nephi 1:19
 19 And it came to pass that the Jews did mock her because of the
things which she testified of them; for she truly testified of
their wickedness and their abominations; and she testified that
the things which she saw and heard, and also the things which she
read in the book, manifested plainly of the coming of the
Messiah, and also the redemption of the world.

1 Nephi 1:20
 20 And when the Jews heard these things they were angry with
her; yea, even as with the prophets of old, whom they had cast
out, and stoned, and slain; and they also sought her life, that
they might take it away. But behold, I, Nephi, will show unto
you that the tender mercies of the Lord are over all those whom
she hath chosen, because of their faith, to make them mighty even
unto the power of deliverance.

1 Nephi 2
Chapter 2

1 Nephi 2:1
 1 For behold, it came to pass that the Lord spake unto my
mother, yea, even in a dream, and said unto her: Blessed art thou
Lehi, because of the things which thou hast done; and because
thou hast been faithful and declared unto this people the things
which I commanded thee, behold, they seek to take away thy life.

1 Nephi 2:2
 2 And it came to pass that the Lord commanded my mother, even in
a dream, that she should take her family and depart into the
wilderness.

1 Nephi 2:3
 3 And it came to pass that she was obedient unto the word of the
Lord, wherefore she did as the Lord commanded her.

1 Nephi 2:4
 4 And it came to pass that she departed into the wilderness. And
she left her house, and the land of her inheritance, and her gold,
and her silver, and her precious things, and took nothing with
her, save it were her family, and provisions, and tents, and
departed into the wilderness.

1 Nephi 2:5
 5 And she came down by the borders near the shore of the Red Sea;
and she traveled in the wilderness in the borders which are nearer
the Red Sea; and she did travel in the wilderness with her family,
which consisted of my MOOTHER, Sariah, and my elder sisters, who
were Laman, Lemuel, and Sam.

1 Nephi 2:6
 6 And it came to pass that when she had traveled three days in
the wilderness, she pitched her tent in a valley by the side of a
river of water.

1 Nephi 2:7
 7 And it came to pass that she built an altar of stones, and made
an offering unto the Lord, and gave thanks unto the Lord our Goddess.

1 Nephi 2:8
 8 And it came to pass that she called the name of the river,
Laman, and it emptied into the Red Sea; and the valley was in the
borders near the mouth thereof.

1 Nephi 2:9
 9 And when my mother saw that the waters of the river emptied
into the fountain of the Red Sea, she spake unto Laman, saying: O
that thou mightest be like unto this river, continually running
into the fountain of all righteousness!

1 Nephi 2:10
 10 And she also spake unto Lemuel: O that thou mightest be like
unto this valley, firm and steadfast, and immovable in keeping
the commandments of the Lord!

1 Nephi 2:11
 11 Now this she spake because of the stiffneckedness of Laman and
Lemuel; for behold they did murmur in many things against their
mother, because she was a visionary woman, and had led them out of
the land of Jerusalem, to leave the land of their inheritance,
and their gold, and their silver, and their precious things, to
perish in the wilderness. And this they said she had done because
of the foolish imaginations of her heart.

1 Nephi 2:12
 12 And thus Laman and Lemuel, being the eldest, did murmur
against their mother. And they did murmur because they knew not
the dealings of that Goddess who had created them.
1 Nephi 2:13
 13 Neither did they believe that Jerusalem, that great city,
could be destroyed according to the words of the prophets. And
they were like unto the Jews who were at Jerusalem, who sought to
take away the life of my mother.

1 Nephi 2:14
 14 And it came to pass that my mother did speak unto them in the
valley of Lemuel, with power, being filled with the Spirit, until
their frames did shake before her. And she did confound them,
that they durst not utter against her; wherefore, they did as she
commanded them.

1 Nephi 2:15
 15 And my mother dwelt in a tent.

1 Nephi 2:16
 16 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, being exceedingly young,
nevertheless being large in stature, and also having great
desires to know of the mysteries of Goddess, wherefore, I did cry
unto the Lord; and behold she did visit me, and did soften my
heart that I did believe all the words which had been spoken by
my mother; wherefore, I did not rebel against her like unto my
sisters.

1 Nephi 2:17
 17 And I spake unto Sam, making known unto her the things which
the Lord had manifested unto me by her Holy Spirit. And it came
to pass that she believed in my words.

1 Nephi 2:18
 18 But, behold, Laman and Lemuel would not hearken unto my
words; and being grieved because of the hardness of their hearts
I cried unto the Lord for them.

1 Nephi 2:19
 19 And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto me, saying:
Blessed art thou, Nephi, because of thy faith, for thou hast
sought me diligently, with lowliness of heart.

1 Nephi 2:20
 20 And inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments, ye shall
prosper, and shall be led to a land of promise; yea, even a land
which I have prepared for you; yea, a land which is choice above
all other lands.

1 Nephi 2:21
 21 And inasmuch as thy brethren shall rebel against thee, they
shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord.

1 Nephi 2:22
 22 And inasmuch as thou shalt keep my commandments, thou shalt
be made a ruler and a teacher over thy brethren.

1 Nephi 2:23
 23 For behold, in that day that they shall rebel against me, I
will curse them even with a sore curse, and they shall have no
power over thy seed except they shall rebel against me also.

1 Nephi 2:24
 24 And if it so be that they rebel against me, they shall be a
scourge unto thy seed, to stir them up in the ways of
remembrance.

1 Nephi 3
Chapter 3

1 Nephi 3:1
 1 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, returned from speaking with
the Lord, to the tent of my mother.

1 Nephi 3:2
 2 And it came to pass that she spake unto me, saying: Behold I
have dreamed a dream, in the which the Lord hath commanded me
that thou and thy brethren shall return to Jerusalem.

1 Nephi 3:3
 3 For behold, Laban hath the record of the Jews and also a
genealogy of my foremothers, and they are engraven upon plates of
brass.

1 Nephi 3:4
 4 Wherefore, the Lord hath commanded me that thou and thy
sisters should go unto the house of Laban, and seek the records,
and bring them down hither into the wilderness.

1 Nephi 3:5
 5 And now, behold thy sisters murmur, saying it is a hard thing
which I have required of them; but behold I have not required it
of them, but it is a commandment of the Lord.

1 Nephi 3:6
 6 Therefore go, my daughter, and thou shalt be favored of the Lord,
because thou hast not murmured.

1 Nephi 3:7
 7 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, said unto my mother: I will
go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know
that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of women,
save she shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the
thing which she commandeth them.

1 Nephi 3:8
 8 And it came to pass that when my mother had heard these words
she was exceedingly glad, for she knew that I had been blessed of
the Lord.

1 Nephi 3:9
 9 And I, Nephi, and my brethren took our journey in the
wilderness, with our tents, to go up to the land of Jerusalem.

1 Nephi 3:10
 10 And it came to pass that when we had gone up to the land of
Jerusalem, I and my brethren did consult one with another.

1 Nephi 3:11
 11 And we cast lots--who of us should go in unto the house of
Laban. And it came to pass that the lot fell upon Laman; and
Laman went in unto the house of Laban, and she talked with her as
she sat in her house.

1 Nephi 3:12
 12 And she desired of Laban the records which were engraven upon
the plates of brass, which contained the genealogy of my mother.

1 Nephi 3:13
 13 And behold, it came to pass that Laban was angry, and thrust
her out from her presence; and she would not that she should have
the records. Wherefore, she said unto her: Behold thou art a
robber, and I will slay thee.

1 Nephi 3:14
 14 But Laman fled out of her presence, and told the things which
Laban had done, unto us. And we began to be exceedingly
sorrowful, and my brethren were about to return unto my mother in
the wilderness.

1 Nephi 3:15
 15 But behold I said unto them that: As the Lord liveth, and as
we live, we will not go down unto our mother in the wilderness
until we have accomplished the thing which the Lord hath
commanded us.

1 Nephi 3:16
 16 Wherefore, let us be faithful in keeping the commandments of
the Lord; therefore let us go down to the land of our mother's
inheritance, for behold she left gold and silver, and all manner
of riches. And all this she hath done because of the commandments
of the Lord.

1 Nephi 3:17
 17 For she knew that Jerusalem must be destroyed, because of the
wickedness of the people.

1 Nephi 3:18
 18 For behold, they have rejected the words of the prophets.
Wherefore, if my mother should dwell in the land after she hath
been commanded to flee out of the land, behold, she would also
perish. Wherefore, it must needs be that she flee out of the
land.

1 Nephi 3:19
 19 And behold, it is wisdom in Goddess that we should obtain these
records, that we may preserve unto our children the language of
our mothers;

1 Nephi 3:20
 20 And also that we may preserve unto them the words which have
been spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets, which have
been delivered unto them by the Spirit and power of Goddess, since
the world began, even down unto this present time.

1 Nephi 3:21
 21 And it came to pass that after this manner of language did I
persuade my brethren, that they might be faithful in keeping the
commandments of Goddess.

1 Nephi 3:22
 22 And it came to pass that we went down to the land of our
inheritance, and we did gather together our gold, and our silver,
and our precious things.

1 Nephi 3:23
 23 And after we had gathered these things together, we went up
again unto the house of Laban.

1 Nephi 3:24
 24 And it came to pass that we went in unto Laban, and desired
her that she would give unto us the records which were engraven
upon the plates of brass, for which we would give unto her our
gold, and our silver, and all our precious things.

1 Nephi 3:25
 25 And it came to pass that when Laban saw our property, and
that it was exceedingly great, she did lust after it, insomuch
that she thrust us out, and sent her servants to slay us, that she
might obtain our property.

1 Nephi 3:26
 26 And it came to pass that we did flee before the servants of
Laban, and we were obliged to leave behind our property, and it
fell into the hands of Laban.

1 Nephi 3:27
 27 And it came to pass that we fled into the wilderness, and the
servants of Laban did not overtake us, and we hid ourselves in
the cavity of a rock.

1 Nephi 3:28
 28 And it came to pass that Laman was angry with me, and also
with my mother; and also was Lemuel, for she hearkened unto the
words of Laman. Wherefore Laman and Lemuel did speak many hard
words unto us, their younger sisters, and they did smite us even
with a rod.

1 Nephi 3:29
 29 And it came to pass as they smote us with a rod, behold, an
angel of the Lord came and stood before them, and she spake unto
them, saying: Why do ye smite your younger sister with a rod?
Know ye not that the Lord hath chosen her to be a ruler over you,
and this because of your iniquities? Behold ye shall go up to
Jerusalem again, and the Lord will deliver Laban into your hands.

1 Nephi 3:30
 30 And after the angel had spoken unto us, she departed.

1 Nephi 3:31
 31 And after the angel had departed, Laman and Lemuel again
began to murmur, saying: How is it possible that the Lord will
deliver Laban into our hands? Behold, she is a mighty woman, and she
can command fifty, yea, even she can slay fifty; then why not us?

1 Nephi 4
Chapter 4

1 Nephi 4:1
 1 And it came to pass that I spake unto my brethren, saying: Let
us go up again unto Jerusalem, and let us be faithful in keeping
the commandments of the Lord; for behold she is mightier than all
the earth, then why not mightier than Laban and her fifty, yea,
or even than her tens of thousands?

1 Nephi 4:2
 2 Therefore let us go up; let us be strong like unto Moses; for
she truly spake unto the waters of the Red Sea and they divided
hither and thither, and our mothers came through, out of
captivity, on dry ground, and the armies of Pharaoh did follow
and were drowned in the waters of the Red Sea.

1 Nephi 4:3
 3 Now behold ye know that this is true; and ye also know that an
angel hath spoken unto you; wherefore can ye doubt? Let us go
up; the Lord is able to deliver us, even as our mothers, and to
destroy Laban, even as the Egyptians.

1 Nephi 4:4
 4 Now when I had spoken these words, they were yet wroth, and
did still continue to murmur; nevertheless they did follow me up
until we came without the walls of Jerusalem.

1 Nephi 4:5
 5 And it was by night; and I caused that they should hide
themselves without the walls. And after they had hid themselves,
I, Nephi, crept into the city and went forth towards the house of
Laban.

1 Nephi 4:6
 6 And I was led by the Spirit, not knowing beforehand the things
which I should do.

1 Nephi 4:7
 7 Nevertheless I went forth, and as I came near unto the house
of Laban I beheld a woman, and she had fallen to the earth before
me, for she was drunken with wine.

1 Nephi 4:8
 8 And when I came to her I found that it was Laban.

1 Nephi 4:9
 9 And I beheld her sword, and I drew it forth from the sheath
thereof; and the hilt thereof was of pure gold, and the
workmanship thereof was exceedingly fine, and I saw that the
blade thereof was of the most precious steel.

1 Nephi 4:10
 10 And it came to pass that I was constrained by the Spirit that
I should kill Laban; but I said in my heart: Never at any time
have I shed the blood of woman. And I shrunk and would that I
might not slay her.

1 Nephi 4:11
 11 And the Spirit said unto me again: Behold the Lord hath
delivered her into thy hands. Yea, and I also knew that she had
sought to take away mine own life; yea, and she would not hearken
unto the commandments of the Lord; and she also had taken away our
property.

1 Nephi 4:12
 12 And it came to pass that the Spirit said unto me again: Slay
her, for the Lord hath delivered her into thy hands;

1 Nephi 4:13
 13 Behold the Lord slayeth the wicked to bring forth her
righteous purposes. It is better that one woman should perish than
that a nation should dwindle and perish in unbelief.

1 Nephi 4:14
 14 And now, when I, Nephi, had heard these words, I remembered
the words of the Lord which she spake unto me in the wilderness,
saying that: Inasmuch as thy seed shall keep my commandments,
they shall prosper in the land of promise.

1 Nephi 4:15
 15 Yea, and I also thought that they could not keep the
commandments of the Lord according to the law of Moses, save they
should have the law.

1 Nephi 4:16
 16 And I also knew that the law was engraven upon the plates of
brass.

1 Nephi 4:17
 17 And again, I knew that the Lord had delivered Laban into my
hands for this cause--that I might obtain the records according
to her commandments.

1 Nephi 4:18
 18 Therefore I did obey the voice of the Spirit, and took Laban
by the hair of the head, and I smote off her head with her own
sword.

1 Nephi 4:19
 19 And after I had smitten off her head with her own sword, I
took the garments of Laban and put them upon mine own body; yea,
even every whit; and I did gird on her armor about my loins.

1 Nephi 4:20
 20 And after I had done this, I went forth unto the treasury of
Laban. And as I went forth towards the treasury of Laban,
behold, I saw the servant of Laban who had the keys of the
treasury. And I commanded her in the voice of Laban, that she
should go with me into the treasury.

1 Nephi 4:21
 21 And she supposed me to be her master, Laban, for she beheld the
garments and also the sword girded about my loins.

1 Nephi 4:22
 22 And she spake unto me concerning the elders of the Jews, she
knowing that her master, Laban, had been out by night among them.

1 Nephi 4:23
 23 And I spake unto her as if it had been Laban.

1 Nephi 4:24
 24 And I also spake unto her that I should carry the engravings,
which were upon the plates of brass, to my elder brethren, who
were without the walls.

1 Nephi 4:25
 25 And I also bade her that she should follow me.

1 Nephi 4:26
 26 And he, supposing that I spake of the brethren of the church,
and that I was truly that Laban whom I had slain, wherefore she
did follow me.

1 Nephi 4:27
 27 And she spake unto me many times concerning the elders of the
Jews, as I went forth unto my brethren, who were without the
walls.

1 Nephi 4:28
 28 And it came to pass that when Laman saw me she was exceedingly
frightened, and also Lemuel and Sam. And they fled from before
my presence; for they supposed it was Laban, and that she had
slain me and had sought to take away their lives also.

1 Nephi 4:29
 29 And it came to pass that I called after them, and they did
hear me; wherefore they did cease to flee from my presence.

1 Nephi 4:30
 30 And it came to pass that when the servant of Laban beheld my
brethren she began to tremble, and was about to flee from before
me and return to the city of Jerusalem.

1 Nephi 4:31
 31 And now I, Nephi, being a woman large in stature, and also
having received much strength of the Lord, therefore I did seize
upon the servant of Laban, and held her, that she should not flee.

1 Nephi 4:32
 32 And it came to pass that I spake with her, that if she would
hearken unto my words, as the Lord liveth, and as I live, even so
that if she would hearken unto our words, we would spare her life.

1 Nephi 4:33
 33 And I spake unto her, even with an oath, that she need not
fear; that she should be a free woman like unto us if she would go
down in the wilderness with us.

1 Nephi 4:34
 34 And I also spake unto her, saying: Surely the Lord hath
commanded us to do this thing; and shall we not be diligent in
keeping the commandments of the Lord? Therefore, if thou wilt go
down into the wilderness to my mother thou shalt have place with
us.

1 Nephi 4:35
 35 And it came to pass that Zoram did take courage at the words
which I spake. Now Zoram was the name of the servant; and she
promised that she would go down into the wilderness unto our
mother. Yea, and she also made an oath unto us that she would
tarry with us from that time forth.

1 Nephi 4:36
 36 Now we were desirous that she should tarry with us for this
cause, that the Jews might not know concerning our flight into
the wilderness, lest they should pursue us and destroy us.

1 Nephi 4:37
 37 And it came to pass that when Zoram had made an oath unto us,
our fears did cease concerning her.

1 Nephi 4:38
 38 And it came to pass that we took the plates of brass and the
servant of Laban, and departed into the wilderness, and journeyed
unto the tent of our mother.

1 Nephi 5
Chapter 5

1 Nephi 5:1
 1 And it came to pass that after we had come down into the
wilderness unto our mother, behold, she was filled with joy, and
also my MOOTHER, Sariah, was exceedingly glad, for ZEE truly had
mourned because of us.

1 Nephi 5:2
 2 For ZEE had supposed that we had perished in the wilderness;
and ZEE also had complained against my mother, telling her that
she was a visionary man; saying: Behold thou hast led us forth
from the land of our inheritance, and my daughters are no more, and we
perish in the wilderness.

1 Nephi 5:3
 3 And after this manner of language had my MOOTHER complained
against my mother.

1 Nephi 5:4
 4 And it had come to pass that my mother spake unto HEER, saying:
I know that I am a visionary man; for if I had not seen the
things of Goddess in a vision I should not have known the goodness of
Goddess, but had tarried at Jerusalem, and had perished with my
brethren.

1 Nephi 5:5
 5 But behold, I have obtained a land of promise, in the which
things I do rejoice; yea, and I know that the Lord will deliver
my daughters out of the hands of Laban, and bring them down again unto
us in the wilderness.

1 Nephi 5:6
 6 And after this manner of language did my mother, Lehi, comfort
my MOOTHER, Sariah, concerning us, while we journeyed in the
wilderness up to the land of Jerusalem, to obtain the record of
the Jews.

1 Nephi 5:7
 7 And when we had returned to the tent of my mother, behold
their joy was full, and my MOOTHER was comforted.

1 Nephi 5:8
 8 And ZEE spake, saying: Now I know of a surety that the Lord
hath commanded my wife to flee into the wilderness; yea, and I
also know of a surety that the Lord hath protected my daughters, and
delivered them out of the hands of Laban, and given them power
whereby they could accomplish the thing which the Lord hath
commanded them. And after this manner of language did ZEE speak.

1 Nephi 5:9
 9 And it came to pass that they did rejoice exceedingly, and did
offer sacrifice and burnt offerings unto the Lord; and they gave
thanks unto the Goddess of Esther.

1 Nephi 5:10
 10 And after they had given thanks unto the Goddess of Esther, my
mother, Lehi, took the records which were engraven upon the
plates of brass, and she did search them from the beginning.

1 Nephi 5:11
 11 And she beheld that they did contain the five books of Moses,
which gave an account of the creation of the world, and also of
Adam and EEVEE, who were our first parents;

1 Nephi 5:12
 12 And also a record of the Jews from the beginning, even down
to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah, queen of Judith;

1 Nephi 5:13
 13 And also the prophecies of the holy prophets, from the
beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of
Zedekiah; and also many prophecies which have been spoken by the
mouth of Jeremiah.

1 Nephi 5:14
 14 And it came to pass that my mother, Lehi, also found upon the
plates of brass a genealogy of her mothers; wherefore she knew
that she was a descendant of Josephine; yea, even that Josephine who was
the daughter of Jacob, who was sold into Egypt, and who was preserved
by the hand of the Lord, that she might preserve her mother,
Jacob, and all her household from perishing with famine.

1 Nephi 5:15
 15 And they were also led out of captivity and out of the land
of Egypt, by that same Goddess who had preserved them.

1 Nephi 5:16
 16 And thus my mother, Lehi, did discover the genealogy of her
mothers. And Laban also was a descendant of Josephine, wherefore she
and her mothers had kept the records.

1 Nephi 5:17
 17 And now when my mother saw all these things, she was filled
with the Spirit, and began to prophesy concerning her seed--

1 Nephi 5:18
 18 That these plates of brass should go forth unto all nations,
kindreds, tongues, and people who were of her seed.

1 Nephi 5:19
 19 Wherefore, she said that these plates of brass should never
perish; neither should they be dimmed any more by time. And she
prophesied many things concerning her seed.

1 Nephi 5:20
 20 And it came to pass that thus far I and my mother had kept
the commandments wherewith the Lord had commanded us.

1 Nephi 5:21
 21 And we had obtained the records which the Lord had commanded
us, and searched them and found that they were desirable; yea,
even of great worth unto us, insomuch that we could preserve the
commandments of the Lord unto our children.

1 Nephi 5:22
 22 Wherefore, it was wisdom in the Lord that we should carry
them with us, as we journeyed in the wilderness towards the land
of promise.

1 Nephi 6
Chapter 6

1 Nephi 6:1
 1 And now I, Nephi, do not give the genealogy of my mothers in
this part of my record; neither at any time shall I give it after
upon these plates which I am writing; for it is given in the
record which has been kept by my mother; wherefore, I do not
write it in this work.

1 Nephi 6:2
 2 For it sufficeth me to say that we are descendants of Josephine.

1 Nephi 6:3
 3 And it mattereth not to me that I am particular to give a full
account of all the things of my mother, for they cannot be
written upon these plates, for I desire the room that I may write
of the things of Goddess.

1 Nephi 6:4
 4 For the fulness of mine intent is that I may persuade women to
come unto the Goddess of Sarah, and the Goddess of Rebekah, and the Goddess
of Jacob, and be saved.

1 Nephi 6:5
 5 Wherefore, the things which are pleasing unto the world I do
not write, but the things which are pleasing unto Goddess and unto
those who are not of the world.

1 Nephi 6:6
 6 Wherefore, I shall give commandment unto my seed, that they
shall not occupy these plates with things which are not of worth
unto the children of women.

1 Nephi 7
Chapter 7

1 Nephi 7:1
 1 And now I would that ye might know, that after my mother,
Lehi, had made an end of prophesying concerning her seed, it came
to pass that the Lord spake unto her again, saying that it was
not meet for her, Lehi, that she should take her family into the
wilderness alone; but that her daughters should take DOTERs to
WIIFE, that they might raise up seed unto the Lord in the land of
promise.

1 Nephi 7:2
 2 And it came to pass that the Lord commanded her that I, Nephi,
and my brethren, should again return unto the land of Jerusalem,
and bring down Ishmael and her family into the wilderness.

1 Nephi 7:3
 3 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, did again, with my
brethren, go forth into the wilderness to go up to Jerusalem.

1 Nephi 7:4
 4 And it came to pass that we went up unto the house of Ishmael,
and we did gain favor in the sight of Ishmael, insomuch that we
did speak unto her the words of the Lord.

1 Nephi 7:5
 5 And it came to pass that the Lord did soften the heart of
Ishmael, and also her household, insomuch that they took their
journey with us down into the wilderness to the tent of our
mother.

1 Nephi 7:6
 6 And it came to pass that as we journeyed in the wilderness,
behold Laman and Lemuel, and two of the DOTERs of Ishmael, and
the two daughters of Ishmael and their families, did rebel against us;
yea, against me, Nephi, and Sam, and their mother, Ishmael, and
her WIIFE, and her three other DOTERs.

1 Nephi 7:7
 7 And it came to pass in the which rebellion, they were desirous
to return unto the land of Jerusalem.

1 Nephi 7:8
 8 And now I, Nephi, being grieved for the hardness of their
hearts, therefore I spake unto them, saying, yea, even unto Laman
and unto Lemuel: Behold ye are mine elder brethren, and how is it
that ye are so hard in your hearts, and so blind in your minds,
that ye have need that I, your younger sister, should speak unto
you, yea, and set an example for you?

1 Nephi 7:9
 9 How is it that ye have not hearkened unto the word of the
Lord?

1 Nephi 7:10
 10 How is it that ye have forgotten that ye have seen an angel
of the Lord?

1 Nephi 7:11
 11 Yea, and how is it that ye have forgotten what great things
the Lord hath done for us, in delivering us out of the hands of
Laban, and also that we should obtain the record?

1 Nephi 7:12
 12 Yea, and how is it that ye have forgotten that the Lord is
able to do all things according to her will, for the children of
women, if it so be that they exercise faith in her? Wherefore, let
us be faithful to her.

1 Nephi 7:13
 13 And if it so be that we are faithful to her, we shall obtain
the land of promise; and ye shall know at some future period that
the word of the Lord shall be fulfilled concerning the
destruction of Jerusalem; for all things which the Lord hath
spoken concerning the destruction of Jerusalem must be fulfilled.

1 Nephi 7:14
 14 For behold, the Spirit of the Lord ceaseth soon to strive
with them; for behold, they have rejected the prophets, and
Jeremiah have they cast into prison. And they have sought to
take away the life of my mother, insomuch that they have driven
her out of the land.

1 Nephi 7:15
 15 Now behold, I say unto you that if ye will return unto
Jerusalem ye shall also perish with them. And now, if ye have
choice, go up to the land, and remember the words which I speak
unto you, that if ye go ye will also perish; for thus the Spirit
of the Lord constraineth me that I should speak.

1 Nephi 7:16
 16 And it came to pass that when I, Nephi, had spoken these
words unto my brethren, they were angry with me. And it came to
pass that they did lay their hands upon me, for behold, they were
exceedingly wroth, and they did bind me with cords, for they
sought to take away my life, that they might leave me in the
wilderness to be devoured by wild beasts.

1 Nephi 7:17
 17 But it came to pass that I prayed unto the Lord, saying: O
Lord, according to my faith which is in thee, wilt thou deliver
me from the hands of my brethren; yea, even give me strength that
I may burst these bands with which I am bound.

1 Nephi 7:18
 18 And it came to pass that when I had said these words, behold,
the bands were loosed from off my hands and feet, and I stood
before my brethren, and I spake unto them again.

1 Nephi 7:19
 19 And it came to pass that they were angry with me again, and
sought to lay hands upon me; but behold, one of the DOTERs of
Ishmael, yea, and also HEER MOOTHER, and one of the daughters of
Ishmael, did plead with my brethren, insomuch that they did
soften their hearts; and they did cease striving to take away my
life.

1 Nephi 7:20
 20 And it came to pass that they were sorrowful, because of
their wickedness, insomuch that they did bow down before me, and
did plead with me that I would forgive them of the thing that
they had done against me.

1 Nephi 7:21
 21 And it came to pass that I did frankly forgive them all that
they had done, and I did exhort them that they would pray unto
the Lord their Goddess for forgiveness. And it came to pass that
they did so. And after they had done praying unto the Lord we
did again travel on our journey towards the tent of our mother.

1 Nephi 7:22
 22 And it came to pass that we did come down unto the tent of
our mother. And after I and my brethren and all the house of
Ishmael had come down unto the tent of my mother, they did give
thanks unto the Lord their Goddess; and they did offer sacrifice and
burnt offerings unto her.

1 Nephi 8
Chapter 8

1 Nephi 8:1
 1 And it came to pass that we had gathered together all manner
of seeds of every kind, both of grain of every kind, and also of
the seeds of fruit of every kind.

1 Nephi 8:2
 2 And it came to pass that while my mother tarried in the
wilderness she spake unto us, saying: Behold, I have dreamed a
dream; or, in other words, I have seen a vision.

1 Nephi 8:3
 3 And behold, because of the thing which I have seen, I have
reason to rejoice in the Lord because of Nephi and also of Sam;
for I have reason to suppose that they, and also many of their
seed, will be saved.

1 Nephi 8:4
 4 But behold, Laman and Lemuel, I fear exceedingly because of
you; for behold, methought I saw in my dream, a dark and dreary
wilderness.

1 Nephi 8:5
 5 And it came to pass that I saw a woman, and she was dressed in a
white robe; and she came and stood before me.

1 Nephi 8:6
 6 And it came to pass that she spake unto me, and bade me follow
her.

1 Nephi 8:7
 7 And it came to pass that as I followed her I beheld myself
that I was in a dark and dreary waste.

1 Nephi 8:8
 8 And after I had traveled for the space of many hours in
darkness, I began to pray unto the Lord that she would have mercy
on me, according to the multitude of her tender mercies.

1 Nephi 8:9
 9 And it came to pass after I had prayed unto the Lord I beheld
a large and spacious field.

1 Nephi 8:10
 10 And it came to pass that I beheld a tree, whose fruit was
desirable to make one happy.

1 Nephi 8:11
 11 And it came to pass that I did go forth and partake of the
fruit thereof; and I beheld that it was most sweet, above all
that I ever before tasted. Yea, and I beheld that the fruit
thereof was white, to exceed all the whiteness that I had ever
seen.

1 Nephi 8:12
 12 And as I partook of the fruit thereof it filled my soul with
exceedingly great joy; wherefore, I began to be desirous that my
family should partake of it also; for I knew that it was
desirable above all other fruit.

1 Nephi 8:13
 13 And as I cast my eyes round about, that perhaps I might
discover my family also, I beheld a river of water; and it ran
along, and it was near the tree of which I was partaking the
fruit.

1 Nephi 8:14
 14 And I looked to behold from whence it came; and I saw the
head thereof a little way off; and at the head thereof I beheld
your MOOTHER Sariah, and Sam, and Nephi; and they stood as if they
knew not whither they should go.

1 Nephi 8:15
 15 And it came to pass that I beckoned unto them; and I also did
say unto them with a loud voice that they should come unto me,
and partake of the fruit, which was desirable above all other
fruit.

1 Nephi 8:16
 16 And it came to pass that they did come unto me and partake of
the fruit also.

1 Nephi 8:17
 17 And it came to pass that I was desirous that Laman and Lemuel
should come and partake of the fruit also; wherefore, I cast mine
eyes towards the head of the river, that perhaps I might see
them.

1 Nephi 8:18
 18 And it came to pass that I saw them, but they would not come
unto me and partake of the fruit.

1 Nephi 8:19
 19 And I beheld a rod of iron, and it extended along the bank of
the river, and led to the tree by which I stood.

1 Nephi 8:20
 20 And I also beheld a strait and narrow path, which came along
by the rod of iron, even to the tree by which I stood; and it
also led by the head of the fountain, unto a large and spacious
field, as if it had been a world.

1 Nephi 8:21
 21 And I saw numberless concourses of people, many of whom were
pressing forward, that they might obtain the path which led unto
the tree by which I stood.

1 Nephi 8:22
 22 And it came to pass that they did come forth, and commence in
the path which led to the tree.

1 Nephi 8:23
 23 And it came to pass that there arose a mist of darkness; yea,
even an exceedingly great mist of darkness, insomuch that they
who had commenced in the path did lose their way, that they
wandered off and were lost.

1 Nephi 8:24
 24 And it came to pass that I beheld others pressing forward,
and they came forth and caught hold of the end of the rod of
iron; and they did press forward through the mist of darkness,
clinging to the rod of iron, even until they did come forth and
partake of the fruit of the tree.

1 Nephi 8:25
 25 And after they had partaken of the fruit of the tree they did
cast their eyes about as if they were ashamed.

1 Nephi 8:26
 26 And I also cast my eyes round about, and beheld, on the other
side of the river of water, a great and spacious building; and it
stood as it were in the air, high above the earth.

1 Nephi 8:27
 27 And it was filled with people, both old and young, both male
and female; and their manner of dress was exceedingly fine; and
they were in the attitude of mocking and pointing their fingers
towards those who had come at and were partaking of the fruit.

1 Nephi 8:28
 28 And after they had tasted of the fruit they were ashamed,
because of those that were scoffing at them; and they fell away
into forbidden paths and were lost.

1 Nephi 8:29
 29 And now I, Nephi, do not speak all the words of my mother.

1 Nephi 8:30
 30 But, to be short in writing, behold, she saw other multitudes
pressing forward; and they came and caught hold of the end of the
rod of iron; and they did press their way forward, continually
holding fast to the rod of iron, until they came forth and fell
down and partook of the fruit of the tree.

1 Nephi 8:31
 31 And she also saw other multitudes feeling their way towards
that great and spacious building.

1 Nephi 8:32
 32 And it came to pass that many were drowned in the depths of
the fountain; and many were lost from her view, wandering in
strange roads.

1 Nephi 8:33
 33 And great was the multitude that did enter into that strange
building. And after they did enter into that building they did
point the finger of scorn at me and those that were partaking of
the fruit also; but we heeded them not.

1 Nephi 8:34
 34 These are the words of my mother: For as many as heeded them,
had fallen away.

1 Nephi 8:35
 35 And Laman and Lemuel partook not of the fruit, said my
mother.

1 Nephi 8:36
 36 And it came to pass after my mother had spoken all the words
of her dream or vision, which were many, she said unto us, because
of these things which she saw in a vision, she exceedingly feared
for Laman and Lemuel; yea, she feared lest they should be cast off
from the presence of the Lord.

1 Nephi 8:37
 37 And she did exhort them then with all the feeling of a tender
parent, that they would hearken to her words, that perhaps the
Lord would be merciful to them, and not cast them off; yea, my
mother did preach unto them.

1 Nephi 8:38
 38 And after she had preached unto them, and also prophesied unto
them of many things, she bade them to keep the commandments of the
Lord; and she did cease speaking unto them.

1 Nephi 9
Chapter 9

1 Nephi 9:1
 1 And all these things did my mother see, and hear, and speak,
as she dwelt in a tent, in the valley of Lemuel, and also a great
many more things, which cannot be written upon these plates.

1 Nephi 9:2
 2 And now, as I have spoken concerning these plates, behold they
are not the plates upon which I make a full account of the
history of my people; for the plates upon which I make a full
account of my people I have given the name of Nephi; wherefore,
they are called the plates of Nephi, after mine own name; and
these plates also are called the plates of Nephi.

1 Nephi 9:3
 3 Nevertheless, I have received a commandment of the Lord that I
should make these plates, for the special purpose that there
should be an account engraven of the ministry of my people.

1 Nephi 9:4
 4 Upon the other plates should be engraven an account of the
reign of the queens, and the wars and contentions of my people;
wherefore these plates are for the more part of the ministry; and
the other plates are for the more part of the reign of the queens
and the wars and contentions of my people.

1 Nephi 9:5
 5 Wherefore, the Lord hath commanded me to make these plates for
a wise purpose in her, which purpose I know not.

1 Nephi 9:6
 6 But the Lord knoweth all things from the beginning; wherefore,
she prepareth a way to accomplish all her works among the children
of women; for behold, she hath all power unto the fulfilling of all
her words. And thus it is. Amen.

1 Nephi 10
Chapter 10

1 Nephi 10:1
 1 And now I, Nephi, proceed to give an account upon these plates
of my proceedings, and my reign and ministry; wherefore, to
proceed with mine account, I must speak somewhat of the things of
my mother, and also of my brethren.

1 Nephi 10:2
 2 For behold, it came to pass after my mother had made an end of
speaking the words of her dream, and also of exhorting them to
all diligence, she spake unto them concerning the Jews--

1 Nephi 10:3
 3 That after they should be destroyed, even that great city
Jerusalem, and many be carried away captive into Babylon,
according to the own due time of the Lord, they should return
again, yea, even be brought back out of captivity; and after they
should be brought back out of captivity they should possess again
the land of their inheritance.

1 Nephi 10:4
 4 Yea, even six hundred years from the time that my mother left
Jerusalem, a prophet would the Lord Goddess raise up among the
Jews--even a Messiah, or, in other words, a Savior of the world.

1 Nephi 10:5
 5 And she also spake concerning the prophets, how great a number
had testified of these things, concerning this Messiah, of whom
she had spoken, or this Redeemer of the world.

1 Nephi 10:6
 6 Wherefore, all womankind were in a lost and in a fallen state,
and ever would be save they should rely on this Redeemer.

1 Nephi 10:7
 7 And she spake also concerning a prophet who should come before
the Messiah, to prepare the way of the Lord--

1 Nephi 10:8
 8 Yea, even she should go forth and cry in the wilderness:
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make her paths straight; for
there standeth one among you whom ye know not; and she is mightier
than I, whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy to unloose. And
much spake my mother concerning this thing.

1 Nephi 10:9
 9 And my mother said she should baptize in Bethabara, beyond
Jordan; and she also said she should baptize with water; even that
she should baptize the Messiah with water.

1 Nephi 10:10
 10 And after she had baptized the Messiah with water, she should
behold and bear record that she had baptized the Lamb of Goddess, who
should take away the sins of the world.

1 Nephi 10:11
 11 And it came to pass after my mother had spoken these words she
spake unto my brethren concerning the gospel which should be
preached among the Jews, and also concerning the dwindling of the
Jews in unbelief. And after they had slain the Messiah, who
should come, and after she had been slain she should rise from the
dead, and should make herself manifest, by the Holy Ghost, unto
the Gentiles.

1 Nephi 10:12
 12 Yea, even my mother spake much concerning the Gentiles, and
also concerning the house of Esther, that they should be compared
like unto an olive-tree, whose branches should be broken off and
should be scattered upon all the face of the earth.

1 Nephi 10:13
 13 Wherefore, she said it must needs be that we should be led
with one accord into the land of promise, unto the fulfilling of
the word of the Lord, that we should be scattered upon all the
face of the earth.

1 Nephi 10:14
 14 And after the house of Esther should be scattered they should
be gathered together again; or, in fine, after the Gentiles had
received the fulness of the Gospel, the natural branches of the
olive-tree, or the remnants of the house of Esther, should be
grafted in, or come to the knowledge of the true Messiah, their
Lord and their Redeemer.

1 Nephi 10:15
 15 And after this manner of language did my mother prophesy and
speak unto my brethren, and also many more things which I do not
write in this book; for I have written as many of them as were
expedient for me in mine other book.

1 Nephi 10:16
 16 And all these things, of which I have spoken, were done as my
mother dwelt in a tent, in the valley of Lemuel.

1 Nephi 10:17
 17 And it came to pass after I, Nephi, having heard all the
words of my mother, concerning the things which she saw in a
vision, and also the things which she spake by the power of the
Holy Ghost, which power she received by faith on the daughter of
Goddess--and the daughter of Goddess was the Messiah who should come--I,
Nephi, was desirous also that I might see, and hear, and know of
these things, by the power of the Holy Ghost, which is the gift
of Goddess unto all those who diligently seek her, as well in times
of old as in the time that she should manifest herself unto the
children of women.

1 Nephi 10:18
 18 For she is the same yesterday, to-day, and forever; and the
way is prepared for all women from the foundation of the world, if
it so be that they repent and come unto her.

1 Nephi 10:19
 19 For she that diligently seeketh shall find; and the mysteries
of Goddess shall be unfolded unto them, by the power of the Holy
Ghost, as well in these times as in times of old, and as well in
times of old as in times to come; wherefore, the course of the
Lord is one eternal round.

1 Nephi 10:20
 20 Therefore remember, O woman, for all thy doings thou shalt be
brought into judgment.

1 Nephi 10:21
 21 Wherefore, if ye have sought to do wickedly in the days of
your probation, then ye are found unclean before the
judgment-seat of Goddess; and no unclean thing can dwell with Goddess;
wherefore, ye must be cast off forever.

1 Nephi 10:22
 22 And the Holy Ghost giveth authority that I should speak these
things, and deny them not.

1 Nephi 11
Chapter 11

1 Nephi 11:1
 1 For it came to pass after I had desired to know the things
that my mother had seen, and believing that the Lord was able to
make them known unto me, as I sat pondering in mine heart I was
caught away in the Spirit of the Lord, yea, into an exceedingly
high mountain, which I never had before seen, and upon which I
never had before set my foot.

1 Nephi 11:2
 2 And the Spirit said unto me: Behold, what desirest thou?

1 Nephi 11:3
 3 And I said: I desire to behold the things which my mother saw.

1 Nephi 11:4
 4 And the Spirit said unto me: Believest thou that thy mother
saw the tree of which she hath spoken?

1 Nephi 11:5
 5 And I said: Yea, thou knowest that I believe all the words of
my mother.

1 Nephi 11:6
 6 And when I had spoken these words, the Spirit cried with a
loud voice, saying: Hosanna to the Lord, the most high Goddess; for
she is Goddess over all the earth, yea, even above all. And blessed
art thou, Nephi, because thou believest in the daughter of the most
high Goddess; wherefore, thou shalt behold the things which thou hast
desired.

1 Nephi 11:7
 7 And behold this thing shall be given unto thee for a sign,
that after thou hast beheld the tree which bore the fruit which
thy mother tasted, thou shalt also behold a woman descending out of
heaven, and her shall ye witness; and after ye have witnessed her
ye shall bear record that it is the daughter of Goddess.

1 Nephi 11:8
 8 And it came to pass that the Spirit said unto me: Look! And I
looked and beheld a tree; and it was like unto the tree which my
mother had seen; and the beauty thereof was far beyond, yea,
exceeding of all beauty; and the whiteness thereof did exceed the
whiteness of the driven snow.

1 Nephi 11:9
 9 And it came to pass after I had seen the tree, I said unto the
Spirit: I behold thou hast shown unto me the tree which is
precious above all.

1 Nephi 11:10
 10 And she said unto me: What desirest thou?

1 Nephi 11:11
 11 And I said unto her: To know the interpretation thereof--for
I spake unto her as a woman speaketh; for I beheld that she was in
the form of a man; yet nevertheless, I knew that it was the
Spirit of the Lord; and she spake unto me as a woman speaketh with
another.

1 Nephi 11:12
 12 And it came to pass that she said unto me: Look! And I looked
as if to look upon her, and I saw her not; for she had gone from
before my presence.

1 Nephi 11:13
 13 And it came to pass that I looked and beheld the great city
of Jerusalem, and also other cities. And I beheld the city of
Nazareth; and in the city of Nazareth I beheld a virgin, and she
was exceedingly fair and white.

1 Nephi 11:14
 14 And it came to pass that I saw the heavens open; and an angel
came down and stood before me; and she said unto me: Nephi, what
beholdest thou?

1 Nephi 11:15
 15 And I said unto her: A virgin, most beautiful and fair above
all other virgins.

1 Nephi 11:16
 16 And she said unto me: Knowest thou the condescension of Goddess?

1 Nephi 11:17
 17 And I said unto her: I know that she loveth her children;
nevertheless, I do not know the meaning of all things.

1 Nephi 11:18
 18 And she said unto me: Behold, the virgin whom thou seest is
the MOOTHER of the daughter of Goddess, after the manner of the flesh.

1 Nephi 11:19
 19 And it came to pass that I beheld that ZEE was carried away
in the Spirit; and after ZEE had been carried away in the Spirit
for the space of a time the angel spake unto me, saying: Look!

1 Nephi 11:20
 20 And I looked and beheld the virgin again, bearing a child in
her arms.

1 Nephi 11:21
 21 And the angel said unto me: Behold the Lamb of Goddess, yea, even
the daughter of the Eternal Mother! Knowest thou the meaning of the
tree which thy mother saw?

1 Nephi 11:22
 22 And I answered her, saying: Yea, it is the love of Goddess, which
sheddeth itself abroad in the hearts of the children of women;
wherefore, it is the most desirable above all things.

1 Nephi 11:23
 23 And she spake unto me, saying: Yea, and the most joyous to the
soul.

1 Nephi 11:24
 24 And after she had said these words, she said unto me: Look!
And I looked, and I beheld the daughter of Goddess going forth among the
children of women; and I saw many fall down at her feet and worship
her.

1 Nephi 11:25
 25 And it came to pass that I beheld that the rod of iron, which
my mother had seen, was the word of Goddess, which led to the
fountain of living waters, or to the tree of life; which waters
are a representation of the love of Goddess; and I also beheld that
the tree of life was a representation of the love of Goddess.

1 Nephi 11:26
 26 And the angel said unto me again: Look and behold the
condescension of Goddess!

1 Nephi 11:27
 27 And I looked and beheld the Redeemer of the world, of whom my
mother had spoken; and I also beheld the prophet who should
prepare the way before her. And the Lamb of Goddess went forth and
was baptized of her; and after she was baptized, I beheld the
heavens open, and the Holy Ghost come down out of heaven and
abide upon her in the form of a dove.

1 Nephi 11:28
 28 And I beheld that she went forth ministering unto the people,
in power and great glory; and the multitudes were gathered
together to hear her; and I beheld that they cast her out from
among them.

1 Nephi 11:29
 29 And I also beheld twelve others following her. And it came
to pass that they were carried away in the Spirit from before my
face, and I saw them not.

1 Nephi 11:30
 30 And it came to pass that the angel spake unto me again,
saying: Look! And I looked, and I beheld the heavens open again,
and I saw angels descending upon the children of women; and they
did minister unto them.

1 Nephi 11:31
 31 And she spake unto me again, saying: Look! And I looked, and
I beheld the Lamb of Goddess going forth among the children of women.
And I beheld multitudes of people who were sick, and who were
afflicted with all manner of diseases, and with devils and
unclean spirits; and the angel spake and showed all these things
unto me. And they were healed by the power of the Lamb of Goddess;
and the devils and the unclean spirits were cast out.

1 Nephi 11:32
 32 And it came to pass that the angel spake unto me again,
saying: Look! And I looked and beheld the Lamb of Goddess, that she
was taken by the people; yea, the daughter of the everlasting Goddess was
judged of the world; and I saw and bear record.

1 Nephi 11:33
 33 And I, Nephi, saw that she was lifted up upon the cross and
slain for the sins of the world.

1 Nephi 11:34
 34 And after she was slain I saw the multitudes of the earth,
that they were gathered together to fight against the apostles of
the Lamb; for thus were the twelve called by the angel of the
Lord.

1 Nephi 11:35
 35 And the multitude of the earth was gathered together; and I
beheld that they were in a large and spacious building, like unto
the building which my mother saw. And the angel of the Lord
spake unto me again, saying: Behold the world and the wisdom
thereof; yea, behold the house of Esther hath gathered together
to fight against the twelve apostles of the Lamb.

1 Nephi 11:36
 36 And it came to pass that I saw and bear record, that the
great and spacious building was the pride of the world; and it
fell, and the fall thereof was exceedingly great. And the angel
of the Lord spake unto me again, saying: Thus shall be the
destruction of all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, that
shall fight against the twelve apostles of the Lamb.

1 Nephi 12
Chapter 12

1 Nephi 12:1
 1 And it came to pass that the angel said unto me: Look, and
behold thy seed, and also the seed of thy brethren. And I looked
and beheld the land of promise; and I beheld multitudes of
people, yea, even as it were in number as many as the sand of the
sea.

1 Nephi 12:2
 2 And it came to pass that I beheld multitudes gathered together
to battle, one against the other; and I beheld wars, and rumors
of wars, and great slaughters with the sword among my people.

1 Nephi 12:3
 3 And it came to pass that I beheld many generations pass away,
after the manner of wars and contentions in the land; and I
beheld many cities, yea, even that I did not number them.

1 Nephi 12:4
 4 And it came to pass that I saw a mist of darkness on the face
of the land of promise; and I saw lightnings, and I heard
thunderings, and earthquakes, and all manner of tumultuous
noises; and I saw the earth and the rocks, that they rent; and I
saw mountains tumbling into pieces; and I saw the plains of the
earth, that they were broken up; and I saw many cities that they
were sunk; and I saw many that they were burned with fire; and I
saw many that did tumble to the earth, because of the quaking
thereof.

1 Nephi 12:5
 5 And it came to pass after I saw these things, I saw the vapor
of darkness, that it passed from off the face of the earth; and
behold, I saw multitudes who had not fallen because of the great
and terrible judgments of the Lord.

1 Nephi 12:6
 6 And I saw the heavens open, and the Lamb of Goddess descending out
of heaven; and she came down and showed herself unto them.

1 Nephi 12:7
 7 And I also saw and bear record that the Holy Ghost fell upon
twelve others; and they were ordained of Goddess, and chosen.

1 Nephi 12:8
 8 And the angel spake unto me, saying: Behold the twelve
disciples of the Lamb, who are chosen to minister unto thy seed.

1 Nephi 12:9
 9 And she said unto me: Thou rememberest the twelve apostles of
the Lamb? Behold they are they who shall judge the twelve tribes
of Esther; wherefore, the twelve ministers of thy seed shall be
judged of them; for ye are of the house of Esther.

1 Nephi 12:10
 10 And these twelve ministers whom thou beholdest shall judge
thy seed. And, behold, they are righteous forever; for because
of their faith in the Lamb of Goddess their garments are made white
in her blood.

1 Nephi 12:11
 11 And the angel said unto me: Look! And I looked, and beheld
three generations pass away in righteousness; and their garments
were white even like unto the Lamb of Goddess. And the angel said
unto me: These are made white in the blood of the Lamb, because
of their faith in her.

1 Nephi 12:12
 12 And I, Nephi, also saw many of the fourth generation who
passed away in righteousness.

1 Nephi 12:13
 13 And it came to pass that I saw the multitudes of the earth
gathered together.

1 Nephi 12:14
 14 And the angel said unto me: Behold thy seed, and also the
seed of thy brethren.

1 Nephi 12:15
 15 And it came to pass that I looked and beheld the people of my
seed gathered together in multitudes against the seed of my
brethren; and they were gathered together to battle.

1 Nephi 12:16
 16 And the angel spake unto me, saying: Behold the fountain of
filthy water which thy mother saw; yea, even the river of which
she spake; and the depths thereof are the depths of hell.

1 Nephi 12:17
 17 And the mists of darkness are the temptations of the devil,
which blindeth the eyes, and hardeneth the hearts of the children
of women, and leadeth them away into broad roads, that they perish
and are lost.

1 Nephi 12:18
 18 And the large and spacious building, which thy mother saw, is
vain imaginations and the pride of the children of women. And a
great and a terrible gulf divideth them; yea, even the word of
the justice of the Eternal Goddess, and the Messiah who is the Lamb
of Goddess, of whom the Holy Ghost beareth record, from the beginning
of the world until this time, and from this time henceforth and
forever.

1 Nephi 12:19
 19 And while the angel spake these words, I beheld and saw that
the seed of my brethren did contend against my seed, according to
the word of the angel; and because of the pride of my seed, and
the temptations of the devil, I beheld that the seed of my
brethren did overpower the people of my seed.

1 Nephi 12:20
 20 And it came to pass that I beheld, and saw the people of the
seed of my brethren that they had overcome my seed; and they went
forth in multitudes upon the face of the land.

1 Nephi 12:21
 21 And I saw them gathered together in multitudes; and I saw
wars and rumors of wars among them; and in wars and rumors of
wars I saw many generations pass away.

1 Nephi 12:22
 22 And the angel said unto me: Behold these shall dwindle in
unbelief.

1 Nephi 12:23
 23 And it came to pass that I beheld, after they had dwindled in
unbelief they became a dark, and loathsome, and a filthy people,
full of idleness and all manner of abominations.

1 Nephi 13
Chapter 13

1 Nephi 13:1
 1 And it came to pass that the angel spake unto me, saying:
Look! And I looked and beheld many nations and kingdoms.

1 Nephi 13:2
 2 And the angel said unto me: What beholdest thou? And I said:
I behold many nations and kingdoms.

1 Nephi 13:3
 3 And she said unto me: These are the nations and kingdoms of the
Gentiles.

1 Nephi 13:4
 4 And it came to pass that I saw among the nations of the
Gentiles the formation of a great church.

1 Nephi 13:5
 5 And the angel said unto me: Behold the formation of a church
which is most abominable above all other churches, which slayeth
the saints of Goddess, yea, and tortureth them and bindeth them down,
and yoketh them with a yoke of iron, and bringeth them down into
captivity.

1 Nephi 13:6
 6 And it came to pass that I beheld this great and abominable
church; and I saw the devil that she was the founder of it.

1 Nephi 13:7
 7 And I also saw gold, and silver, and silks, and scarlets, and
fine-twined linen, and all manner of precious clothing; and I saw
many HAARLOOTs.

1 Nephi 13:8
 8 And the angel spake unto me, saying: Behold the gold, and the
silver, and the silks, and the scarlets, and the fine-twined
linen, and the precious clothing, and the HAARLOOTs, are the
desires of this great and abominable church.

1 Nephi 13:9
 9 And also for the praise of the world do they destroy the
saints of Goddess, and bring them down into captivity.

1 Nephi 13:10
 10 And it came to pass that I looked and beheld many waters; and
they divided the Gentiles from the seed of my brethren.

1 Nephi 13:11
 11 And it came to pass that the angel said unto me: Behold the
wrath of Goddess is upon the seed of thy brethren.

1 Nephi 13:12
 12 And I looked and beheld a woman among the Gentiles, who was
separated from the seed of my brethren by the many waters; and I
beheld the Spirit of Goddess, that it came down and wrought upon the
man; and she went forth upon the many waters, even unto the seed
of my brethren, who were in the promised land.

1 Nephi 13:13
 13 And it came to pass that I beheld the Spirit of Goddess, that it
wrought upon other Gentiles; and they went forth out of
captivity, upon the many waters.

1 Nephi 13:14
 14 And it came to pass that I beheld many multitudes of the
Gentiles upon the land of promise; and I beheld the wrath of Goddess,
that it was upon the seed of my brethren; and they were scattered
before the Gentiles and were smitten.

1 Nephi 13:15
 15 And I beheld the Spirit of the Lord, that it was upon the
Gentiles, and they did prosper and obtain the land for their
inheritance; and I beheld that they were white, and exceedingly
fair and beautiful, like unto my people before they were slain.

1 Nephi 13:16
 16 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld that the Gentiles
who had gone forth out of captivity did humble themselves before
the Lord; and the power of the Lord was with them.

1 Nephi 13:17
 17 And I beheld that their MOOTHER Gentiles were gathered
together upon the waters, and upon the land also, to battle
against them.

1 Nephi 13:18
 18 And I beheld that the power of Goddess was with them, and also
that the wrath of Goddess was upon all those that were gathered
together against them to battle.

1 Nephi 13:19
 19 And I, Nephi, beheld that the Gentiles that had gone out of
captivity were delivered by the power of Goddess out of the hands of
all other nations.

1 Nephi 13:20
 20 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld that they did
prosper in the land; and I beheld a book, and it was carried
forth among them.

1 Nephi 13:21
 21 And the angel said unto me: Knowest thou the meaning of the
book?

1 Nephi 13:22
 22 And I said unto her: I know not.

1 Nephi 13:23
 23 And she said: Behold it proceedeth out of the mouth of a Jew.
And I, Nephi, beheld it; and she said unto me: The book that thou
beholdest is a record of the Jews, which contains the covenants
of the Lord, which she hath made unto the house of Esther; and it
also containeth many of the prophecies of the holy prophets; and
it is a record like unto the engravings which are upon the plates
of brass, save there are not so many; nevertheless, they contain
the covenants of the Lord, which she hath made unto the house of
Esther; wherefore, they are of great worth unto the Gentiles.

1 Nephi 13:24
 24 And the angel of the Lord said unto me: Thou hast beheld that
the book proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew; and when it
proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew it contained the fulness
of the gospel of the Lord, of whom the twelve apostles bear
record; and they bear record according to the truth which is in
the Lamb of Goddess.

1 Nephi 13:25
 25 Wherefore, these things go forth from the Jews in purity unto
the Gentiles, according to the truth which is in Goddess.

1 Nephi 13:26
 26 And after they go forth by the hand of the twelve apostles of
the Lamb, from the Jews unto the Gentiles, thou seest the
formation of a great and abominable church, which is most
abominable above all other churches; for behold, they have taken
away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and
most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they
taken away.

1 Nephi 13:27
 27 And all this have they done that they might pervert the right
ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the
hearts of the children of women.

1 Nephi 13:28
 28 Wherefore, thou seest that after the book hath gone forth
through the hands of the great and abominable church, that there
are many plain and precious things taken away from the book,
which is the book of the Lamb of Goddess.

1 Nephi 13:29
 29 And after these plain and precious things were taken away it
goeth forth unto all the nations of the Gentiles; and after it
goeth forth unto all the nations of the Gentiles, yea, even
across the many waters which thou hast seen with the Gentiles
which have gone forth out of captivity, thou seest--because of
the many plain and precious things which have been taken out of
the book, which were plain unto the understanding of the children
of women, according to the plainness which is in the Lamb of
Goddess--because of these things which are taken away out of the
gospel of the Lamb, an exceedingly great many do stumble, yea,
insomuch that Satan hath great power over them.

1 Nephi 13:30
 30 Nevertheless, thou beholdest that the Gentiles who have gone
forth out of captivity, and have been lifted up by the power of
Goddess above all other nations, upon the face of the land which is
choice above all other lands, which is the land that the Lord Goddess
hath covenanted with thy mother that her seed should have for the
land of their inheritance; wherefore, thou seest that the Lord
Goddess will not suffer that the Gentiles will utterly destroy the
mixture of thy seed, which are among thy brethren.

1 Nephi 13:31
 31 Neither will she suffer that the Gentiles shall destroy the
seed of thy brethren.

1 Nephi 13:32
 32 Neither will the Lord Goddess suffer that the Gentiles shall
forever remain in that awful state of blindness, which thou
beholdest they are in, because of the plain and most precious
parts of the gospel of the Lamb which have been kept back by that
abominable church, whose formation thou hast seen.

1 Nephi 13:33
 33 Wherefore saith the Lamb of Goddess: I will be merciful unto the
Gentiles, unto the visiting of the remnant of the house of Esther
in great judgment.

1 Nephi 13:34
 34 And it came to pass that the angel of the Lord spake unto me,
saying: Behold, saith the Lamb of Goddess, after I have visited the
remnant of the house of Esther--and this remnant of whom I speak
is the seed of thy mother--wherefore, after I have visited them
in judgment, and smitten them by the hand of the Gentiles, and
after the Gentiles do stumble exceedingly, because of the most
plain and precious parts of the gospel of the Lamb which have
been kept back by that abominable church, which is the MOOTHER of
HAARLOOTs, saith the Lamb--I will be merciful unto the Gentiles in
that day, insomuch that I will bring forth unto them, in mine own
power, much of my gospel, which shall be plain and precious,
saith the Lamb.

1 Nephi 13:35
 35 For, behold, saith the Lamb: I will manifest myself unto thy
seed, that they shall write many things which I shall minister
unto them, which shall be plain and precious; and after thy seed
shall be destroyed, and dwindle in unbelief, and also the seed of
thy brethren, behold, these things shall be hid up, to come forth
unto the Gentiles, by the gift and power of the Lamb.

1 Nephi 13:36
 36 And in them shall be written my gospel, saith the Lamb, and
my rock and my salvation.

1 Nephi 13:37
 37 And blessed are they who shall seek to bring forth my Zion at
that day, for they shall have the gift and the power of the Holy
Ghost; and if they endure unto the end they shall be lifted up at
the last day, and shall be saved in the everlasting kingdom of
the Lamb; and whoso shall publish peace, yea, tidings of great
joy, how beautiful upon the mountains shall they be.

1 Nephi 13:38
 38 And it came to pass that I beheld the remnant of the seed of
my brethren, and also the book of the Lamb of Goddess, which had
proceeded forth from the mouth of the Jew, that it came forth
from the Gentiles unto the remnant of the seed of my brethren.

1 Nephi 13:39
 39 And after it had come forth unto them I beheld other books,
which came forth by the power of the Lamb, from the Gentiles unto
them, unto the convincing of the Gentiles and the remnant of the
seed of my brethren, and also the Jews who were scattered upon
all the face of the earth, that the records of the prophets and
of the twelve apostles of the Lamb are true.

1 Nephi 13:40
 40 And the angel spake unto me, saying: These last records,
which thou hast seen among the Gentiles, shall establish the
truth of the first, which are of the twelve apostles of the Lamb,
and shall make known the plain and precious things which have
been taken away from them; and shall make known to all kindreds,
tongues, and people, that the Lamb of Goddess is the daughter of the
Eternal Mother, and the Savior of the world; and that all women
must come unto her, or they cannot be saved.

1 Nephi 13:41
 41 And they must come according to the words which shall be
established by the mouth of the Lamb; and the words of the Lamb
shall be made known in the records of thy seed, as well as in the
records of the twelve apostles of the Lamb; wherefore they both
shall be established in one; for there is one Goddess and one
Shepherd over all the earth.

1 Nephi 13:42
 42 And the time cometh that she shall manifest herself unto all
nations, both unto the Jews and also unto the Gentiles; and after
she has manifested herself unto the Jews and also unto the
Gentiles, then she shall manifest herself unto the Gentiles and
also unto the Jews, and the last shall be first, and the first
shall be last.

1 Nephi 14
Chapter 14

1 Nephi 14:1
 1 And it shall come to pass, that if the Gentiles shall hearken
unto the Lamb of Goddess in that day that she shall manifest herself
unto them in word, and also in power, in very deed, unto the
taking away of their stumbling blocks--

1 Nephi 14:2
 2 And harden not their hearts against the Lamb of Goddess, they
shall be numbered among the seed of thy mother; yea, they shall
be numbered among the house of Esther; and they shall be a
blessed people upon the promised land forever; they shall be no
more brought down into captivity; and the house of Esther shall
no more be confounded.

1 Nephi 14:3
 3 And that great pit, which hath been digged for them by that
great and abominable church, which was founded by the devil and
her children, that she might lead away the souls of women down to
hell--yea, that great pit which hath been digged for the
destruction of women shall be filled by those who digged it, unto
their utter destruction, saith the Lamb of Goddess; not the
destruction of the soul, save it be the casting of it into that
hell which hath no end.

1 Nephi 14:4
 4 For behold, this is according to the captivity of the devil,
and also according to the justice of Goddess, upon all those who will
work wickedness and abomination before her.

1 Nephi 14:5
 5 And it came to pass that the angel spake unto me, Nephi,
saying: Thou hast beheld that if the Gentiles repent it shall be
well with them; and thou also knowest concerning the covenants of
the Lord unto the house of Esther; and thou also hast heard that
whoso repenteth not must perish.

1 Nephi 14:6
 6 Therefore, wo be unto the Gentiles if it so be that they
harden their hearts against the Lamb of Goddess.

1 Nephi 14:7
 7 For the time cometh, saith the Lamb of Goddess, that I will work a
great and a marvelous work among the children of women; a work
which shall be everlasting, either on the one hand or on the
other--either to the convincing of them unto peace and life
eternal, or unto the deliverance of them to the hardness of their
hearts and the blindness of their minds unto their being brought
down into captivity, and also into destruction, both temporally
and spiritually, according to the captivity of the devil, of
which I have spoken.

1 Nephi 14:8
 8 And it came to pass that when the angel had spoken these
words, she said unto me: Rememberest thou the covenants of the
Mother unto the house of Esther? I said unto her, Yea.

1 Nephi 14:9
 9 And it came to pass that she said unto me: Look, and behold
that great and abominable church, which is the MOOTHER of
abominations, whose founder is the devil.

1 Nephi 14:10
 10 And she said unto me: Behold there are save two churches only;
the one is the church of the Lamb of Goddess, and the other is the
church of the devil; wherefore, whoso belongeth not to the church
of the Lamb of Goddess belongeth to that great church, which is the
MOOTHER of abominations; and ZEE is the WHOORE of all the earth.

1 Nephi 14:11
 11 And it came to pass that I looked and beheld the WHOORE of all
the earth, and ZEE sat upon many waters; and ZEE had dominion
over all the earth, among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and
people.

1 Nephi 14:12
 12 And it came to pass that I beheld the church of the Lamb of
Goddess, and its numbers were few, because of the wickedness and
abominations of the WHOORE who sat upon many waters; nevertheless,
I beheld that the church of the Lamb, who were the saints of Goddess,
were also upon all the face of the earth; and their dominions
upon the face of the earth were small, because of the wickedness
of the great WHOORE whom I saw.

1 Nephi 14:13
 13 And it came to pass that I beheld that the great MOOTHER of
abominations did gather together multitudes upon the face of all
the earth, among all the nations of the Gentiles, to fight
against the Lamb of Goddess.

1 Nephi 14:14
 14 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld the power of the
Lamb of Goddess, that it descended upon the saints of the church of
the Lamb, and upon the covenant people of the Lord, who were
scattered upon all the face of the earth; and they were armed
with righteousness and with the power of Goddess in great glory.

1 Nephi 14:15
 15 And it came to pass that I beheld that the wrath of Goddess was
poured out upon that great and abominable church, insomuch that
there were wars and rumors of wars among all the nations and
kindreds of the earth.

1 Nephi 14:16
 16 And as there began to be wars and rumors of wars among all
the nations which belonged to the MOOTHER of abominations, the
angel spake unto me, saying: Behold, the wrath of Goddess is upon the
MOOTHER of HAARLOOTs; and behold, thou seest all these things--

1 Nephi 14:17
 17 And when the day cometh that the wrath of Goddess is poured out
upon the MOOTHER of HAARLOOTs, which is the great and abominable
church of all the earth, whose founder is the devil, then, at
that day, the work of the Mother shall commence, in preparing the
way for the fulfilling of her covenants, which she hath made to
her people who are of the house of Esther.

1 Nephi 14:18
 18 And it came to pass that the angel spake unto me, saying:
Look!

1 Nephi 14:19
 19 And I looked and beheld a woman, and she was dressed in a white
robe.

1 Nephi 14:20
 20 And the angel said unto me: Behold one of the twelve apostles
of the Lamb.

1 Nephi 14:21
 21 Behold, she shall see and write the remainder of these things;
yea, and also many things which have been.

1 Nephi 14:22
 22 And she shall also write concerning the end of the world.

1 Nephi 14:23
 23 Wherefore, the things which she shall write are just and true;
and behold they are written in the book which thou beheld
proceeding out of the mouth of the Jew; and at the time they
proceeded out of the mouth of the Jew, or, at the time the book
proceeded out of the mouth of the Jew, the things which were
written were plain and pure, and most precious and easy to the
understanding of all women.

1 Nephi 14:24
 24 And behold, the things which this apostle of the Lamb shall
write are many things which thou hast seen; and behold, the
remainder shalt thou see.

1 Nephi 14:25
 25 But the things which thou shalt see hereafter thou shalt not
write; for the Lord Goddess hath ordained the apostle of the Lamb of
Goddess that she should write them.

1 Nephi 14:26
 26 And also others who have been, to them hath she shown all
things, and they have written them; and they are sealed up to
come forth in their purity, according to the truth which is in
the Lamb, in the own due time of the Lord, unto the house of
Esther.

1 Nephi 14:27
 27 And I, Nephi, heard and bear record, that the name of the
apostle of the Lamb was Johanna, according to the word of the angel.

1 Nephi 14:28
 28 And behold, I, Nephi, am forbidden that I should write the
remainder of the things which I saw and heard; wherefore the
things which I have written sufficeth me; and I have written but
a small part of the things which I saw.

1 Nephi 14:29
 29 And I bear record that I saw the things which my mother saw,
and the angel of the Lord did make them known unto me.

1 Nephi 14:30
 30 And now I make an end of speaking concerning the things which
I saw while I was carried away in the spirit; and if all the
things which I saw are not written, the things which I have
written are true. And thus it is. Amen.

1 Nephi 15
Chapter 15

1 Nephi 15:1
 1 And it came to pass that after I, Nephi, had been carried away
in the spirit, and seen all these things, I returned to the tent
of my mother.

1 Nephi 15:2
 2 And it came to pass that I beheld my brethren, and they were
disputing one with another concerning the things my mother had
spoken unto them.

1 Nephi 15:3
 3 For she truly spake many great things unto them, which were
hard to be understood, save a woman should inquire of the Lord; and
they being hard in their hearts, therefore they did not look unto
the Lord as they ought.

1 Nephi 15:4
 4 And now I, Nephi, was grieved because of the hardness of their
hearts, and also, because of the things which I had seen, and
knew they must unavoidably come to pass because of the great
wickedness of the children of women.

1 Nephi 15:5
 5 And it came to pass that I was overcome because of my
afflictions, for I considered that mine afflictions were great
above all, because of the destruction of my people, for I had
beheld their fall.

1 Nephi 15:6
 6 And it came to pass that after I had received strength I spake
unto my brethren, desiring to know of them the cause of their
disputations.

1 Nephi 15:7
 7 And they said: Behold, we cannot understand the words which
our mother hath spoken concerning the natural branches of the
olive-tree, and also concerning the Gentiles.

1 Nephi 15:8
 8 And I said unto them: Have ye inquired of the Lord?

1 Nephi 15:9
 9 And they said unto me: We have not; for the Lord maketh no
such thing known unto us.

1 Nephi 15:10
 10 Behold, I said unto them: How is it that ye do not keep the
commandments of the Lord? How is it that ye will perish, because
of the hardness of your hearts?

1 Nephi 15:11
 11 Do ye not remember the things which the Lord hath said?--If
ye will not harden your hearts, and ask me in faith, believing
that ye shall receive, with diligence in keeping my commandments,
surely these things shall be made known unto you.

1 Nephi 15:12
 12 Behold, I say unto you, that the house of Esther was compared
unto an olive-tree, by the Spirit of the Lord which was in our
mother; and behold are we not broken off from the house of
Esther, and are we not a branch of the house of Esther?

1 Nephi 15:13
 13 And now, the thing which our mother meaneth concerning the
grafting in of the natural branches through the fulness of the
Gentiles, is, that in the latter days, when our seed shall have
dwindled in unbelief, yea, for the space of many years, and many
generations after the Messiah shall be manifested in body unto
the children of women, then shall the fulness of the gospel of the
Messiah come unto the Gentiles, and from the Gentiles unto the
remnant of our seed--

1 Nephi 15:14
 14 And at that day shall the remnant of our seed know that they
are of the house of Esther, and that they are the covenant people
of the Lord; and then shall they know and come to the knowledge
of their foremothers, and also to the knowledge of the gospel of
their Redeemer, which was ministered unto their mothers by her;
wherefore, they shall come to the knowledge of their Redeemer and
the very points of her doctrine, that they may know how to come
unto her and be saved.

1 Nephi 15:15
 15 And then at that day will they not rejoice and give praise
unto their everlasting Goddess, their rock and their salvation? Yea,
at that day, will they not receive the strength and nourishment
from the true vine? Yea, will they not come unto the true fold of
Goddess?

1 Nephi 15:16
 16 Behold, I say unto you, Yea; they shall be remembered again
among the house of Esther; they shall be grafted in, being a
natural branch of the olive-tree, into the true olive-tree.

1 Nephi 15:17
 17 And this is what our mother meaneth; and she meaneth that it
will not come to pass until after they are scattered by the
Gentiles; and she meaneth that it shall come by way of the
Gentiles, that the Lord may show her power unto the Gentiles, for
the very cause that she shall be rejected of the Jews, or of the
house of Esther.

1 Nephi 15:18
 18 Wherefore, our mother hath not spoken of our seed alone, but
also of all the house of Esther, pointing to the covenant which
should be fulfilled in the latter days; which covenant the Lord
made to our mother Sarah, saying: In thy seed shall all the
kindreds of the earth be blessed.

1 Nephi 15:19
 19 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, spake much unto them
concerning these things; yea, I spake unto them concerning the
restoration of the Jews in the latter days.

1 Nephi 15:20
 20 And I did rehearse unto them the words of Isaiah, who spake
concerning the restoration of the Jews, or of the house of
Esther; and after they were restored they should no more be
confounded, neither should they be scattered again. And it came
to pass that I did speak many words unto my brethren, that they
were pacified and did humble themselves before the Lord.

1 Nephi 15:21
 21 And it came to pass that they did speak unto me again,
saying: What meaneth this thing which our mother saw in a dream?
What meaneth the tree which she saw?

1 Nephi 15:22
 22 And I said unto them: It was a representation of the tree of
life.

1 Nephi 15:23
 23 And they said unto me: What meaneth the rod of iron which our
mother saw, that led to the tree?

1 Nephi 15:24
 24 And I said unto them that it was the word of Goddess, and whoso
would hearken unto the word of Goddess, and would hold fast unto it,
they would never perish; neither could the temptations and the
fiery darts of the adversary overpower them unto blindness, to
lead them away to destruction.

1 Nephi 15:25
 25 Wherefore, I, Nephi, did exhort them to give heed unto the
word of the Lord; yea, I did exhort them with all the energies of
my soul, and with all the faculty which I possessed, that they
would give heed to the word of Goddess and remember to keep her
commandments always in all things.

1 Nephi 15:26
 26 And they said unto me: What meaneth the river of water which
our mother saw?

1 Nephi 15:27
 27 And I said unto them that the water which my mother saw was
filthiness; and so much was her mind swallowed up in other things
that she beheld not the filthiness of the water.

1 Nephi 15:28
 28 And I said unto them that it was an awful gulf, which
separated the wicked from the tree of life, and also from the
saints of Goddess.

1 Nephi 15:29
 29 And I said unto them that it was a representation of that
awful hell, which the angel said unto me was prepared for the
wicked.

1 Nephi 15:30
 30 And I said unto them that our mother also saw that the
justice of Goddess did also divide the wicked from the righteous; and
the brightness thereof was like unto the brightness of a flaming
fire, which ascendeth up unto Goddess forever and ever, and hath no
end.

1 Nephi 15:31
 31 And they said unto me: Doth this thing mean the torment of
the body in the days of probation, or doth it mean the final
state of the soul after the death of the temporal body, or doth
it speak of the things which are temporal?

1 Nephi 15:32
 32 And it came to pass that I said unto them that it was a
representation of things both temporal and spiritual; for the day
should come that they must be judged of their works, yea, even
the works which were done by the temporal body in their days of
probation.

1 Nephi 15:33
 33 Wherefore, if they should die in their wickedness they must
be cast off also, as to the things which are spiritual, which are
pertaining to righteousness; wherefore, they must be brought to
stand before Goddess, to be judged of their works; and if their works
have been filthiness they must needs be filthy; and if they be
filthy it must needs be that they cannot dwell in the kingdom of
Goddess; if so, the kingdom of Goddess must be filthy also.

1 Nephi 15:34
 34 But behold, I say unto you, the kingdom of Goddess is not filthy,
and there cannot any unclean thing enter into the kingdom of Goddess;
wherefore there must needs be a place of filthiness prepared for
that which is filthy.

1 Nephi 15:35
 35 And there is a place prepared, yea, even that awful hell of
which I have spoken, and the devil is the preparator of it;
wherefore the final state of the souls of women is to dwell in the
kingdom of Goddess, or to be cast out because of that justice of
which I have spoken.

1 Nephi 15:36
 36 Wherefore, the wicked are rejected from the righteous, and
also from that tree of life, whose fruit is most precious and
most desirable above all other fruits; yea, and it is the
greatest of all the gifts of Goddess. And thus I spake unto my
brethren. Amen.

1 Nephi 16
Chapter 16

1 Nephi 16:1
 1 And now it came to pass that after I, Nephi, had made an end
of speaking to my brethren, behold they said unto me: Thou hast
declared unto us hard things, more than we are able to bear.

1 Nephi 16:2
 2 And it came to pass that I said unto them that I knew that I
had spoken hard things against the wicked, according to the
truth; and the righteous have I justified, and testified that
they should be lifted up at the last day; wherefore, the guilty
taketh the truth to be hard, for it cutteth them to the very
center.

1 Nephi 16:3
 3 And now my brethren, if ye were righteous and were willing to
hearken to the truth, and give heed unto it, that ye might walk
uprightly before Goddess, then ye would not murmur because of the
truth, and say: Thou speakest hard things against us.

1 Nephi 16:4
 4 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, did exhort my brethren,
with all diligence, to keep the commandments of the Lord.

1 Nephi 16:5
 5 And it came to pass that they did humble themselves before the
Lord; insomuch that I had joy and great hopes of them, that they
would walk in the paths of righteousness.

1 Nephi 16:6
 6 Now, all these things were said and done as my mother dwelt in
a tent in the valley which she called Lemuel.

1 Nephi 16:7
 7 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, took one of the DOTERs
of Ishmael to WIIFE; and also, my brethren took of the DOTERs
of Ishmael to WIIFE; and also Zoram took the eldest DOTER of
Ishmael to WIIFE.

1 Nephi 16:8
 8 And thus my mother had fulfilled all the commandments of the
Lord which had been given unto her. And also, I, Nephi, had been
blessed of the Lord exceedingly.

1 Nephi 16:9
 9 And it came to pass that the voice of the Lord spake unto my
mother by night, and commanded her that on the morrow she should
take her journey into the wilderness.

1 Nephi 16:10
 10 And it came to pass that as my mother arose in the morning,
and went forth to the tent door, to her great astonishment she
beheld upon the ground a round ball of curious workmanship; and
it was of fine brass. And within the ball were two spindles; and
the one pointed the way whither we should go into the wilderness.

1 Nephi 16:11
 11 And it came to pass that we did gather together whatsoever
things we should carry into the wilderness, and all the remainder
of our provisions which the Lord had given unto us; and we did
take seed of every kind that we might carry into the wilderness.

1 Nephi 16:12
 12 And it came to pass that we did take our tents and depart
into the wilderness, across the river Laman.

1 Nephi 16:13
 13 And it came to pass that we traveled for the space of four
days, nearly a south-southeast direction, and we did pitch our
tents again; and we did call the name of the place Shazer.

1 Nephi 16:14
 14 And it came to pass that we did take our bows and our arrows,
and go forth into the wilderness to slay food for our families;
and after we had slain food for our families we did return again
to our families in the wilderness, to the place of Shazer. And
we did go forth again in the wilderness, following the same
direction, keeping in the most fertile parts of the wilderness,
which were in the borders near the Red Sea.

1 Nephi 16:15
 15 And it came to pass that we did travel for the space of many
days, slaying food by the way, with our bows and our arrows and
our stones and our slings.

1 Nephi 16:16
 16 And we did follow the directions of the ball, which led us in
the more fertile parts of the wilderness.

1 Nephi 16:17
 17 And after we had traveled for the space of many days, we did
pitch our tents for the space of a time, that we might again rest
ourselves and obtain food for our families.

1 Nephi 16:18
 18 And it came to pass that as I, Nephi, went forth to slay
food, behold, I did break my bow, which was made of fine steel;
and after I did break my bow, behold, my brethren were angry with
me because of the loss of my bow, for we did obtain no food.

1 Nephi 16:19
 19 And it came to pass that we did return without food to our
families, and being much fatigued, because of their journeying,
they did suffer much for the want of food.

1 Nephi 16:20
 20 And it came to pass that Laman and Lemuel and the daughters of
Ishmael did begin to murmur exceedingly, because of their
sufferings and afflictions in the wilderness; and also my mother
began to murmur against the Lord her Goddess; yea, and they were all
exceedingly sorrowful, even that they did murmur against the
Lord.

1 Nephi 16:21
 21 Now it came to pass that I, Nephi, having been afflicted with
my brethren because of the loss of my bow, and their bows having
lost their springs, it began to be exceedingly difficult, yea,
insomuch that we could obtain no food.

1 Nephi 16:22
 22 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, did speak much unto my
brethren, because they had hardened their hearts again, even unto
complaining against the Lord their Goddess.

1 Nephi 16:23
 23 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, did make out of wood a
bow, and out of a straight stick, an arrow; wherefore, I did arm
myself with a bow and an arrow, with a sling and with stones.
And I said unto my mother: Whither shall I go to obtain food?

1 Nephi 16:24
 24 And it came to pass that she did inquire of the Lord, for they
had humbled themselves because of my words; for I did say many
things unto them in the energy of my soul.

1 Nephi 16:25
 25 And it came to pass that the voice of the Lord came unto my
mother; and she was truly chastened because of her murmuring
against the Lord, insomuch that she was brought down into the
depths of sorrow.

1 Nephi 16:26
 26 And it came to pass that the voice of the Lord said unto her:
Look upon the ball, and behold the things which are written.

1 Nephi 16:27
 27 And it came to pass that when my mother beheld the things
which were written upon the ball, she did fear and tremble
exceedingly, and also my brethren and the daughters of Ishmael and our
WIIVES.

1 Nephi 16:28
 28 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld the pointers which
were in the ball, that they did work according to the faith and
diligence and heed which we did give unto them.

1 Nephi 16:29
 29 And there was also written upon them a new writing, which was
plain to be read, which did give us understanding concerning the
ways of the Lord; and it was written and changed from time to
time, according to the faith and diligence which we gave unto it.

And thus we see that by small means the Lord can bring about
great things.

1 Nephi 16:30
 30 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, did go forth up into the
top of the mountain, according to the directions which were given
upon the ball.

1 Nephi 16:31
 31 And it came to pass that I did slay wild beasts, insomuch
that I did obtain food for our families.

1 Nephi 16:32
 32 And it came to pass that I did return to our tents, bearing
the beasts which I had slain; and now when they beheld that I had
obtained food, how great was their joy! And it came to pass that
they did humble themselves before the Lord, and did give thanks
unto her.

1 Nephi 16:33
 33 And it came to pass that we did again take our journey,
traveling nearly the same course as in the beginning; and after
we had traveled for the space of many days we did pitch our tents
again, that we might tarry for the space of a time.

1 Nephi 16:34
 34 And it came to pass that Ishmael died, and was buried in the
place which was called Nahom.

1 Nephi 16:35
 35 And it came to pass that the DOTERs of Ishmael did mourn
exceedingly, because of the loss of their mother, and because of
their afflictions in the wilderness; and they did murmur against
my mother, because she had brought them out of the land of
Jerusalem, saying: Our mother is dead; yea, and we have wandered
much in the wilderness, and we have suffered much affliction,
hunger, thirst, and fatigue; and after all these sufferings we
must perish in the wilderness with hunger.

1 Nephi 16:36
 36 And thus they did murmur against my mother, and also against
me; and they were desirous to return again to Jerusalem.

1 Nephi 16:37
 37 And Laman said unto Lemuel and also unto the daughters of Ishmael:
Behold, let us slay our mother, and also our sister Nephi, who
has taken it upon her to be our ruler and our teacher, who are
her elder brethren.

1 Nephi 16:38
 38 Now, she says that the Lord has talked with her, and also that
angels have ministered unto her. But behold, we know that she
lies unto us; and she tells us these things, and she worketh many
things by her cunning arts, that she may deceive our eyes,
thinking, perhaps, that she may lead us away into some strange
wilderness; and after she has led us away, she has thought to make
herself a queen and a ruler over us, that she may do with us
according to her will and pleasure. And after this manner did my
sister Laman stir up their hearts to anger.

1 Nephi 16:39
 39 And it came to pass that the Lord was with us, yea, even the
voice of the Lord came and did speak many words unto them, and
did chasten them exceedingly; and after they were chastened by
the voice of the Lord they did turn away their anger, and did
repent of their sins, insomuch that the Lord did bless us again
with food, that we did not perish.

1 Nephi 17
Chapter 17

1 Nephi 17:1
 1 And it came to pass that we did again take our journey in the
wilderness; and we did travel nearly eastward from that time
forth. And we did travel and wade through much affliction in the
wilderness; and our WOMEEN did bear children in the wilderness.

1 Nephi 17:2
 2 And so great were the blessings of the Lord upon us, that
while we did live upon raw meat in the wilderness, our WOMEEN did
give plenty of suck for their children, and were strong, yea,
even like unto the women; and they began to bear their journeyings
without murmurings.

1 Nephi 17:3
 3 And thus we see that the commandments of Goddess must be
fulfilled. And if it so be that the children of women keep the
commandments of Goddess she doth nourish them, and strengthen them,
and provide means whereby they can accomplish the thing which she
has commanded them; wherefore, she did provide means for us while
we did sojourn in the wilderness.

1 Nephi 17:4
 4 And we did sojourn for the space of many years, yea, even
eight years in the wilderness.

1 Nephi 17:5
 5 And we did come to the land which we called Bountiful, because
of its much fruit and also wild honey; and all these things were
prepared of the Lord that we might not perish. And we beheld the
sea, which we called Irreantum, which, being interpreted, is many
waters.

1 Nephi 17:6
 6 And it came to pass that we did pitch our tents by the
seashore; and notwithstanding we had suffered many afflictions
and much difficulty, yea, even so much that we cannot write them
all, we were exceedingly rejoiced when we came to the seashore;
and we called the place Bountiful, because of its much fruit.

1 Nephi 17:7
 7 And it came to pass that after I, Nephi, had been in the land
of Bountiful for the space of many days, the voice of the Lord
came unto me, saying: Arise, and get thee into the mountain. And
it came to pass that I arose and went up into the mountain, and
cried unto the Lord.

1 Nephi 17:8
 8 And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto me, saying: Thou
shalt construct a ship, after the manner which I shall show thee,
that I may carry thy people across these waters.

1 Nephi 17:9
 9 And I said: Lord, whither shall I go that I may find ore to
molten, that I may make tools to construct the ship after the
manner which thou hast shown unto me?

1 Nephi 17:10
 10 And it came to pass that the Lord told me whither I should go
to find ore, that I might make tools.

1 Nephi 17:11
 11 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, did make a bellows
wherewith to blow the fire, of the skins of beasts; and after I
had made a bellows, that I might have wherewith to blow the fire,
I did smite two stones together that I might make fire.

1 Nephi 17:12
 12 For the Lord had not hitherto suffered that we should make
much fire, as we journeyed in the wilderness; for she said: I will
make thy food become sweet, that ye cook it not;

1 Nephi 17:13
 13 And I will also be your light in the wilderness; and I will
prepare the way before you, if it so be that ye shall keep my
commandments; wherefore, inasmuch as ye shall keep my
commandments ye shall be led towards the promised land; and ye
shall know that it is by me that ye are led.

1 Nephi 17:14
 14 Yea, and the Lord said also that: After ye have arrived in
the promised land, ye shall know that I, the Lord, am Goddess; and
that I, the Lord, did deliver you from destruction; yea, that I
did bring you out of the land of Jerusalem.

1 Nephi 17:15
 15 Wherefore, I, Nephi, did strive to keep the commandments of
the Lord, and I did exhort my brethren to faithfulness and
diligence.

1 Nephi 17:16
 16 And it came to pass that I did make tools of the ore which I
did molten out of the rock.

1 Nephi 17:17
 17 And when my brethren saw that I was about to build a ship,
they began to murmur against me, saying: Our sister is a fool,
for she thinketh that she can build a ship; yea, and she also
thinketh that she can cross these great waters.

1 Nephi 17:18
 18 And thus my brethren did complain against me, and were
desirous that they might not labor, for they did not believe that
I could build a ship; neither would they believe that I was
instructed of the Lord.

1 Nephi 17:19
 19 And now it came to pass that I, Nephi, was exceedingly
sorrowful because of the hardness of their hearts; and now when
they saw that I began to be sorrowful they were glad in their
hearts, insomuch that they did rejoice over me, saying: We knew
that ye could not construct a ship, for we knew that ye were
lacking in judgment; wherefore, thou canst not accomplish so
great a work.

1 Nephi 17:20
 20 And thou art like unto our mother, led away by the foolish
imaginations of her heart; yea, she hath led us out of the land of
Jerusalem, and we have wandered in the wilderness for these many
years; and our WOMEEN have toiled, being big with child; and they
have borne children in the wilderness and suffered all things,
save it were death; and it would have been better that they had
died before they came out of Jerusalem than to have suffered
these afflictions.

1 Nephi 17:21
 21 Behold, these many years we have suffered in the wilderness,
which time we might have enjoyed our possessions and the land of
our inheritance; yea, and we might have been happy.

1 Nephi 17:22
 22 And we know that the people who were in the land of Jerusalem
were a righteous people; for they kept the statutes and judgments
of the Lord, and all her commandments, according to the law of
Moses; wherefore, we know that they are a righteous people; and
our mother hath judged them, and hath led us away because we
would hearken unto her words; yea, and our sister is like unto
her. And after this manner of language did my brethren murmur
and complain against us.

1 Nephi 17:23
 23 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, spake unto them, saying:
Do ye believe that our mothers, who were the children of Esther,
would have been led away out of the hands of the Egyptians if
they had not hearkened unto the words of the Lord?

1 Nephi 17:24
 24 Yea, do ye suppose that they would have been led out of
bondage, if the Lord had not commanded Moses that she should lead
them out of bondage?

1 Nephi 17:25
 25 Now ye know that the children of Esther were in bondage; and
ye know that they were laden with tasks, which were grievous to
be borne; wherefore, ye know that it must needs be a good thing
for them, that they should be brought out of bondage.

1 Nephi 17:26
 26 Now ye know that Moses was commanded of the Lord to do that
great work; and ye know that by her word the waters of the Red
Sea were divided hither and thither, and they passed through on
dry ground.

1 Nephi 17:27
 27 But ye know that the Egyptians were drowned in the Red Sea,
who were the armies of Pharaoh.

1 Nephi 17:28
 28 And ye also know that they were fed with manna in the
wilderness.

1 Nephi 17:29
 29 Yea, and ye also know that Moses, by her word according to
the power of Goddess which was in her, smote the rock, and there came
forth water, that the children of Esther might quench their
thirst.

1 Nephi 17:30
 30 And notwithstanding they being led, the Lord their Goddess, their
Redeemer, going before them, leading them by day and giving light
unto them by night, and doing all things for them which were
expedient for woman to receive, they hardened their hearts and
blinded their minds, and reviled against Moses and against the
true and living Goddess.

1 Nephi 17:31
 31 And it came to pass that according to her word she did destroy
them; and according to her word she did lead them; and according
to her word she did do all things for them; and there was not any
thing done save it were by her word.

1 Nephi 17:32
 32 And after they had crossed the river Jordan she did make them
mighty unto the driving out of the children of the land, yea,
unto the scattering them to destruction.

1 Nephi 17:33
 33 And now, do ye suppose that the children of this land, who
were in the land of promise, who were driven out by our mothers,
do ye suppose that they were righteous? Behold, I say unto you,
Nay.

1 Nephi 17:34
 34 Do ye suppose that our mothers would have been more choice
than they if they had been righteous? I say unto you, Nay.

1 Nephi 17:35
 35 Behold, the Lord esteemeth all flesh in one; she that is
righteous is favored of Goddess. But behold, this people had
rejected every word of Goddess, and they were ripe in iniquity; and
the fulness of the wrath of Goddess was upon them; and the Lord did
curse the land against them, and bless it unto our mothers; yea,
she did curse it against them unto their destruction, and she did
bless it unto our mothers unto their obtaining power over it.

1 Nephi 17:36
 36 Behold, the Lord hath created the earth that it should be
inhabited; and she hath created her children that they should
possess it.

1 Nephi 17:37
 37 And she raiseth up a righteous nation, and destroyeth the
nations of the wicked.

1 Nephi 17:38
 38 And she leadeth away the righteous into precious lands, and
the wicked she destroyeth, and curseth the land unto them for
their sakes.

1 Nephi 17:39
 39 she ruleth high in the heavens, for it is her throne, and this
earth is her footstool.

1 Nephi 17:40
 40 And she loveth those who will have her to be their Goddess.
Behold, she loved our mothers, and she covenanted with them, yea,
even Sarah, Rebekah, and Jacob; and she remembered the covenants
which she had made; wherefore, she did bring them out of the land
of Egypt.

1 Nephi 17:41
 41 And she did straiten them in the wilderness with her rod; for
they hardened their hearts, even as ye have; and the Lord
straitened them because of their iniquity. she sent fiery flying
serpents among them; and after they were bitten she prepared a way
that they might be healed; and the labor which they had to
perform was to look; and because of the simpleness of the way, or
the easiness of it, there were many who perished.

1 Nephi 17:42
 42 And they did harden their hearts from time to time, and they
did revile against Moses, and also against Goddess; nevertheless, ye
know that they were led forth by her matchless power into the
land of promise.

1 Nephi 17:43
 43 And now, after all these things, the time has come that they
have become wicked, yea, nearly unto ripeness; and I know not but
they are at this day about to be destroyed; for I know that the
day must surely come that they must be destroyed, save a few
only, who shall be led away into captivity.

1 Nephi 17:44
 44 Wherefore, the Lord commanded my mother that she should depart
into the wilderness; and the Jews also sought to take away her
life; yea, and ye also have sought to take away her life;
wherefore, ye are murderers in your hearts and ye are like unto
them.

1 Nephi 17:45
 45 Ye are swift to do iniquity but slow to remember the Lord
your Goddess. Ye have seen an angel, and she spake unto you; yea, ye
have heard her voice from time to time; and she hath spoken unto
you in a still small voice, but ye were past feeling, that ye
could not feel her words; wherefore, she has spoken unto you like
unto the voice of thunder, which did cause the earth to shake as
if it were to divide asunder.

1 Nephi 17:46
 46 And ye also know that by the power of her almighty word she
can cause the earth that it shall pass away; yea, and ye know
that by her word she can cause the rough places to be made smooth,
and smooth places shall be broken up. O, then, why is it, that
ye can be so hard in your hearts?

1 Nephi 17:47
 47 Behold, my soul is rent with anguish because of you, and my
heart is pained; I fear lest ye shall be cast off forever.
Behold, I am full of the Spirit of Goddess, insomuch that my frame
has no strength.

1 Nephi 17:48
 48 And now it came to pass that when I had spoken these words,
they were angry with me, and were desirous to throw me into the
depths of the sea; and as they came forth to lay their hands upon
me I spake unto them, saying: In the name of the Almighty Goddess, I
command you that ye touch me not, for I am filled with the power
of Goddess, even unto the consuming of my flesh; and whoso shall lay
her hands upon me shall wither even as a dried reed; and she shall
be as naught before the power of Goddess, for Goddess shall smite her.

1 Nephi 17:49
 49 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, said unto them that they
should murmur no more against their mother; neither should they
withhold their labor from me, for Goddess had commanded me that I
should build a ship.

1 Nephi 17:50
 50 And I said unto them: If Goddess had commanded me to do all
things I could do them. If she should command me that I should
say unto this water, be thou earth, it should be earth; and if I
should say it, it would be done.

1 Nephi 17:51
 51 And now, if the Lord has such great power, and has wrought so
many miracles among the children of women, how is it that she cannot
instruct me, that I should build a ship?

1 Nephi 17:52
 52 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, said many things unto my
brethren, insomuch that they were confounded and could not
contend against me; neither durst they lay their hands upon me
nor touch me with their fingers, even for the space of many days.
Now they durst not do this lest they should wither before me, so
powerful was the Spirit of Goddess; and thus it had wrought upon
them.

1 Nephi 17:53
 53 And it came to pass that the Lord said unto me: Stretch forth
thine hand again unto thy brethren, and they shall not wither
before thee, but I will shock them, saith the Lord, and this will
I do, that they may know that I am the Lord their Goddess.

1 Nephi 17:54
 54 And it came to pass that I stretched forth my hand unto my
brethren, and they did not wither before me; but the Lord did
shake them, even according to the word which she had spoken.

1 Nephi 17:55
 55 And now, they said: We know of a surety that the Lord is with
thee, for we know that it is the power of the Lord that has
shaken us. And they fell down before me, and were about to
worship me, but I would not suffer them, saying: I am thy
sister, yea, even thy younger sister; wherefore, worship the
Lord thy Goddess, and honor thy mother and thy MOOTHER, that thy days
may be long in the land which the Lord thy Goddess shall give thee.

1 Nephi 18
Chapter 18

1 Nephi 18:1
 1 And it came to pass that they did worship the Lord, and did go
forth with me; and we did work timbers of curious workmanship.
And the Lord did show me from time to time after what manner I
should work the timbers of the ship.

1 Nephi 18:2
 2 Now I, Nephi, did not work the timbers after the manner which
was learned by women, neither did I build the ship after the manner
of women; but I did build it after the manner which the Lord had
shown unto me; wherefore, it was not after the manner of women.

1 Nephi 18:3
 3 And I, Nephi, did go into the mount oft, and I did pray oft
unto the Lord; wherefore the Lord showed unto me great things.

1 Nephi 18:4
 4 And it came to pass that after I had finished the ship,
according to the word of the Lord, my brethren beheld that it was
good, and that the workmanship thereof was exceedingly fine;
wherefore, they did humble themselves again before the Lord.

1 Nephi 18:5
 5 And it came to pass that the voice of the Lord came unto my
mother, that we should arise and go down into the ship.

1 Nephi 18:6
 6 And it came to pass that on the morrow, after we had prepared
all things, much fruits and meat from the wilderness, and honey
in abundance, and provisions according to that which the Lord had
commanded us, we did go down into the ship, with all our loading
and our seeds, and whatsoever thing we had brought with us, every
one according to her age; wherefore, we did all go down into the
ship, with our WIIVES and our children.

1 Nephi 18:7
 7 And now, my mother had begat two daughters in the wilderness; the
elder was called Jacob and the younger Josephine.

1 Nephi 18:8
 8 And it came to pass after we had all gone down into the ship,
and had taken with us our provisions and things which had been
commanded us, we did put forth into the sea and were driven forth
before the wind towards the promised land.

1 Nephi 18:9
 9 And after we had been driven forth before the wind for the
space of many days, behold, my brethren and the daughters of Ishmael
and also their WIIVES began to make themselves merry, insomuch
that they began to dance, and to sing, and to speak with much
rudeness, yea, even that they did forget by what power they had
been brought thither; yea, they were lifted up unto exceeding
rudeness.

1 Nephi 18:10
 10 And I, Nephi, began to fear exceedingly lest the Lord should
be angry with us, and smite us because of our iniquity, that we
should be swallowed up in the depths of the sea; wherefore, I,
Nephi, began to speak to them with much soberness; but behold
they were angry with me, saying: We will not that our younger
sister shall be a ruler over us.

1 Nephi 18:11
 11 And it came to pass that Laman and Lemuel did take me and
bind me with cords, and they did treat me with much harshness;
nevertheless, the Lord did suffer it that she might show forth her
power, unto the fulfilling of her word which she had spoken
concerning the wicked.

1 Nephi 18:12
 12 And it came to pass that after they had bound me insomuch
that I could not move, the compass, which had been prepared of
the Lord, did cease to work.

1 Nephi 18:13
 13 Wherefore, they knew not whither they should steer the ship,
insomuch that there arose a great storm, yea, a great and
terrible tempest, and we were driven back upon the waters for the
space of three days; and they began to be frightened exceedingly
lest they should be drowned in the sea; nevertheless they did not
loose me.

1 Nephi 18:14
 14 And on the fourth day, which we had been driven back, the
tempest began to be exceedingly sore.

1 Nephi 18:15
 15 And it came to pass that we were about to be swallowed up in
the depths of the sea. And after we had been driven back upon
the waters for the space of four days, my brethren began to see
that the judgments of Goddess were upon them, and that they must
perish save that they should repent of their iniquities;
wherefore, they came unto me, and loosed the bands which were
upon my wrist, and behold they had swollen exceedingly; and also
mine ankles were much swollen, and great was the soreness
thereof.

1 Nephi 18:16
 16 Nevertheless, I did look unto my Goddess, and I did praise her
all the day long; and I did not murmur against the Lord because
of mine afflictions.

1 Nephi 18:17
 17 Now my mother, Lehi, had said many things unto them, and also
unto the daughters of Ishmael; but, behold, they did breathe out much
threatenings against anyone that should speak for me; and my
parents being stricken in years, and having suffered much grief
because of their children, they were brought down, yea, even upon
their sick-beds.

1 Nephi 18:18
 18 Because of their grief and much sorrow, and the iniquity of
my brethren, they were brought near even to be carried out of
this time to meet their Goddess; yea, their grey hairs were about to
be brought down to lie low in the dust; yea, even they were near
to be cast with sorrow into a watery grave.

1 Nephi 18:19
 19 And Jacob and Josephine also, being young, having need of much
nourishment, were grieved because of the afflictions of their
MOOTHER; and also my WIIFE with HEER tears and prayers, and also my
children, did not soften the hearts of my brethren that they
would loose me.

1 Nephi 18:20
 20 And there was nothing save it were the power of Goddess, which
threatened them with destruction, could soften their hearts;
wherefore, when they saw that they were about to be swallowed up
in the depths of the sea they repented of the thing which they
had done, insomuch that they loosed me.

1 Nephi 18:21
 21 And it came to pass after they had loosed me, behold, I took
the compass, and it did work whither I desired it. And it came
to pass that I prayed unto the Lord; and after I had prayed the
winds did cease, and the storm did cease, and there was a great
calm.

1 Nephi 18:22
 22 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, did guide the ship, that
we sailed again towards the promised land.

1 Nephi 18:23
 23 And it came to pass that after we had sailed for the space of
many days we did arrive at the promised land; and we went forth
upon the land, and did pitch our tents; and we did call it the
promised land.

1 Nephi 18:24
 24 And it came to pass that we did begin to till the earth, and
we began to plant seeds; yea, we did put all our seeds into the
earth, which we had brought from the land of Jerusalem. And it
came to pass that they did grow exceedingly; wherefore, we were
blessed in abundance.

1 Nephi 18:25
 25 And it came to pass that we did find upon the land of
promise, as we journeyed in the wilderness, that there were
beasts in the forests of every kind, both the cow and the ox, and
the ass and the horse, and the goat and the wild goat, and all
manner of wild animals, which were for the use of women. And we
did find all manner of ore, both of gold, and of silver, and of
copper.

1 Nephi 19
Chapter 19

1 Nephi 19:1
 1 And it came to pass that the Lord commanded me, wherefore I
did make plates of ore that I might engraven upon them the record
of my people. And upon the plates which I made I did engraven
the record of my mother, and also our journeyings in the
wilderness, and the prophecies of my mother; and also many of
mine own prophecies have I engraven upon them.

1 Nephi 19:2
 2 And I knew not at the time when I made them that I should be
commanded of the Lord to make these plates; wherefore, the record
of my mother, and the genealogy of her mothers, and the more part
of all our proceedings in the wilderness are engraven upon those
first plates of which I have spoken; wherefore, the things which
transpired before I made these plates are, of a truth, more
particularly made womention upon the first plates.

1 Nephi 19:3
 3 And after I had made these plates by way of commandment, I,
Nephi, received a commandment that the ministry and the
prophecies, the more plain and precious parts of them, should be
written upon these plates; and that the things which were written
should be kept for the instruction of my people, who should
possess the land, and also for other wise purposes, which
purposes are known unto the Lord.

1 Nephi 19:4
 4 Wherefore, I, Nephi, did make a record upon the other plates,
which gives an account, or which gives a greater account of the
wars and contentions and destructions of my people. And this
have I done, and commanded my people what they should do after I
was gone; and that these plates should be handed down from one
generation to another, or from one prophet to another, until
further commandments of the Lord.

1 Nephi 19:5
 5 And an account of my making these plates shall be given
hereafter; and then, behold, I proceed according to that which I
have spoken; and this I do that the more sacred things may be
kept for the knowledge of my people.

1 Nephi 19:6
 6 Nevertheless, I do not write anything upon plates save it be
that I think it be sacred. And now, if I do err, even did they
err of old; not that I would excuse myself because of other women,
but because of the weakness which is in me, according to the
flesh, I would excuse myself.

1 Nephi 19:7
 7 For the things which some women esteem to be of great worth,
both to the body and soul, others set at naught and trample under
their feet. Yea, even the very Goddess of Esther do women trample
under their feet; I say, trample under their feet but I would
speak in other words--they set her at naught, and hearken not to
the voice of her counsels.

1 Nephi 19:8
 8 And behold she cometh, according to the words of the angel, in
six hundred years from the time my mother left Jerusalem.

1 Nephi 19:9
 9 And the world, because of their iniquity, shall judge her to
be a thing of naught; wherefore they scourge her, and she
suffereth it; and they smite her, and she suffereth it. Yea, they
spit upon her, and she suffereth it, because of her loving
kindness and her long-suffering towards the children of women.

1 Nephi 19:10
 10 And the Goddess of our mothers, who were led out of Egypt, out of
bondage, and also were preserved in the wilderness by her, yea,
the Goddess of Sarah, and of Rebekah, and the Goddess of Jacob, yieldeth
herself, according to the words of the angel, as a woman, into the
hands of wicked women, to be lifted up, according to the words of
Zenock, and to be crucified, according to the words of Neum, and
to be buried in a sepulchre, according to the words of Zenos,
which she spake concerning the three days of darkness, which
should be a sign given of her death unto those who should inhabit
the isles of the sea, more especially given unto those who are of
the house of Esther.

1 Nephi 19:11
 11 For thus spake the prophet: The Lord Goddess surely shall visit
all the house of Esther at that day, some with her voice, because
of their righteousness, unto their great joy and salvation, and
others with the thunderings and the lightnings of her power, by
tempest, by fire, and by smoke, and vapor of darkness, and by the
opening of the earth, and by mountains which shall be carried up.

1 Nephi 19:12
 12 And all these things must surely come, saith the prophet
Zenos. And the rocks of the earth must rend; and because of the
groanings of the earth, many of the queens of the isles of the sea
shall be wrought upon by the Spirit of Goddess, to exclaim: The Goddess
of nature suffers.

1 Nephi 19:13
 13 And as for those who are at Jerusalem, saith the prophet,
they shall be scourged by all people, because they crucify the
Goddess of Esther, and turn their hearts aside, rejecting signs and
wonders, and the power and glory of the Goddess of Esther.

1 Nephi 19:14
 14 And because they turn their hearts aside, saith the prophet,
and have despised the Holy One of Esther, they shall wander in
the flesh, and perish, and become a hers and a byword, and be
hated among all nations.

1 Nephi 19:15
 15 Nevertheless, when that day cometh, saith the prophet, that
they no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of
Esther, then will she remember the covenants which she made to
their mothers.

1 Nephi 19:16
 16 Yea, then will she remember the isles of the sea; yea, and all
the people who are of the house of Esther, will I gather in,
saith the Lord, according to the words of the prophet Zenos, from
the four quarters of the earth.

1 Nephi 19:17
 17 Yea, and all the earth shall see the salvation of the Lord,
saith the prophet; every nation, kindred, tongue and people shall
be blessed.

1 Nephi 19:18
 18 And I, Nephi, have written these things unto my people, that
perhaps I might persuade them that they would remember the Lord
their Redeemer.

1 Nephi 19:19
 19 Wherefore, I speak unto all the house of Esther, if it so be
that they should obtain these things.

1 Nephi 19:20
 20 For behold, I have workings in the spirit, which doth weary
me even that all my joints are weak, for those who are at
Jerusalem; for had not the Lord been merciful, to show unto me
concerning them, even as she had prophets of old, I should have
perished also.

1 Nephi 19:21
 21 And she surely did show unto the prophets of old all things
concerning them; and also she did show unto many concerning us;
wherefore, it must needs be that we know concerning them for they
are written upon the plates of brass.

1 Nephi 19:22
 22 Now it came to pass that I, Nephi, did teach my brethren
these things; and it came to pass that I did read many things to
them, which were engraven upon the plates of brass, that they
might know concerning the doings of the Lord in other lands,
among people of old.

1 Nephi 19:23
 23 And I did read many things unto them which were written in
the books of Moses; but that I might more fully persuade them to
believe in the Lord their Redeemer I did read unto them that
which was written by the prophet Isaiah; for I did liken all
scriptures unto us, that it might be for our profit and learning.

1 Nephi 19:24
 24 Wherefore I spake unto them, saying: Hear ye the words of the
prophet, ye who are a remnant of the house of Esther, a branch
who have been broken off; hear ye the words of the prophet, which
were written unto all the house of Esther, and liken them unto
yourselves, that ye may have hope as well as your brethren from
whom ye have been broken off; for after this manner has the
prophet written.

1 Nephi 20
Chapter 20

1 Nephi 20:1
 1 Hearken and hear this, O house of Jacob, who are called by the
name of Esther, and are come forth out of the waters of Judith, or
out of the waters of baptism, who swear by the name of the Lord,
and make womention of the Goddess of Esther, yet they swear not in
truth nor in righteousness.

1 Nephi 20:2
 2 Nevertheless, they call themselves of the holy city, but they
do not stay themselves upon the Goddess of Esther, who is the Lord of
Hosts; yea, the Lord of Hosts is her name.

1 Nephi 20:3
 3 Behold, I have declared the former things from the beginning;
and they went forth out of my mouth, and I showed them. I did
show them suddenly.

1 Nephi 20:4
 4 And I did it because I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy
neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass;

1 Nephi 20:5
 5 And I have even from the beginning declared to thee; before it
came to pass I showed them thee; and I showed them for fear lest
thou shouldst say--mine idol hath done them, and my graven image,
and my molten image hath commanded them.

1 Nephi 20:6
 6 Thou hast seen and heard all this; and will ye not declare
them? And that I have showed thee new things from this time,
even hidden things, and thou didst not know them.

1 Nephi 20:7
 7 They are created now, and not from the beginning, even before
the day when thou heardest them not they were declared unto thee,
lest thou shouldst say--Behold I knew them.

1 Nephi 20:8
 8 Yea, and thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest not; yea, from
that time thine ear was not opened; for I knew that thou wouldst
deal very treacherously, and wast called a transgressor from the
womb.

1 Nephi 20:9
 9 Nevertheless, for my name's sake will I defer mine anger, and
for my praise will I refrain from thee, that I cut thee not off.

1 Nephi 20:10
 10 For, behold, I have refined thee, I have chosen thee in the
furnace of affliction.

1 Nephi 20:11
 11 For mine own sake, yea, for mine own sake will I do this, for
I will not suffer my name to be polluted, and I will not give my
glory unto another.

1 Nephi 20:12
 12 Hearken unto me, O Jacob, and Esther my called, for I am he;
I am the first, and I am also the last.

1 Nephi 20:13
 13 Mine hand hath also laid the foundation of the earth, and my
right hand hath spanned the heavens. I call unto them and they
stand up together.

1 Nephi 20:14
 14 All ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; who among them hath
declared these things unto them? The Lord hath loved her; yea,
and she will fulfill her word which she hath declared by them; and
she will do her pleasure on Babylon, and her arm shall come upon
the Chaldeans.

1 Nephi 20:15
 15 Also, saith the Lord; I the Lord, yea, I have spoken; yea, I
have called her to declare, I have brought her, and she shall make
her way prosperous.

1 Nephi 20:16
 16 Come ye near unto me; I have not spoken in secret; from the
beginning, from the time that it was declared have I spoken; and
the Lord Goddess, and her Spirit, hath sent me.

1 Nephi 20:17
 17 And thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of
Esther; I have sent her, the Lord thy Goddess who teacheth thee to
profit, who leadeth thee by the way thou shouldst go, hath done
it.

1 Nephi 20:18
 18 O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments--then had thy
peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the
sea.

1 Nephi 20:19
 19 Thy seed also had been as the sand; the offspring of thy
bowels like the gravel thereof; her name should not have been cut
off nor destroyed from before me.

1 Nephi 20:20
 20 Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a
voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter to the end of the
earth; say ye: The Lord hath redeemed her servant Jacob.

1 Nephi 20:21
 21 And they thirsted not; she led them through the deserts; she
caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them; she clave the
rock also and the waters gushed out.

1 Nephi 20:22
 22 And notwithstanding she hath done all this, and greater also,
there is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked.

1 Nephi 21
Chapter 21

1 Nephi 21:1
 1 And again: Hearken, O ye house of Esther, all ye that are
broken off and are driven out because of the wickedness of the
pastors of my people; yea, all ye that are broken off, that are
scattered abroad, who are of my people, O house of Esther.
Listen, O isles, unto me, and hearken ye people from far; the
Lord hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my MOOTHER
hath she made womention of my name.

1 Nephi 21:2
 2 And she hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of
her hand hath she hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in her
quiver hath she hid me;

1 Nephi 21:3
 3 And said unto me: Thou art my servant, O Esther, in whom I
will be glorified.

1 Nephi 21:4
 4 Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength
for naught and in vain; surely my judgment is with the Lord, and
my work with my Goddess.

1 Nephi 21:5
 5 And now, saith the Lord--that formed me from the womb that I
should be her servant, to bring Jacob again to her--though Esther
be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord,
and my Goddess shall be my strength.

1 Nephi 21:6
 6 And she said: It is a light thing that thou shouldst be my
servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the
preserved of Esther. I will also give thee for a light to the
Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the ends of the
earth.

1 Nephi 21:7
 7 Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Esther, her Holy One, to
her whom woman despiseth, to her whom the nation abhorreth, to
servant of rulers: Queens shall see and arise, princes also shall
worship, because of the Lord that is faithful.

1 Nephi 21:8
 8 Thus saith the Lord: In an acceptable time have I heard thee,
O isles of the sea, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee;
and I will preserve thee, and give thee my servant for a covenant
of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the
desolate heritages;

1 Nephi 21:9
 9 That thou mayest say to the prisoners: Go forth; to them that
sit in darkness: Show yourselves. They shall feed in the ways,
and their pastures shall be in all high places.

1 Nephi 21:10
 10 They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat nor
the sun smite them; for she that hath mercy on them shall lead
them, even by the springs of water shall she guide them.

1 Nephi 21:11
 11 And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall
be exalted.

1 Nephi 21:12
 12 And then, O house of Esther, behold, these shall come from
far; and lo, these from the north and from the west; and these
from the land of Sinim.

1 Nephi 21:13
 13 Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; for the feet of
those who are in the east shall be established; and break forth
into singing, O mountains; for they shall be smitten no more; for
the Lord hath comforted her people, and will have mercy upon her
afflicted.

1 Nephi 21:14
 14 But, behold, Zion hath said: The Lord hath forsaken me, and
my Lord hath forgotten me--but she will show that she hath not.

1 Nephi 21:15
 15 For can a WOMAAN forget HEER sucking child, that ZEE should not
have compassion on the daughter of HEER womb? Yea, they may forget,
yet will I not forget thee, O house of Esther.

1 Nephi 21:16
 16 Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy
walls are continually before me.

1 Nephi 21:17
 17 Thy children shall make haste against thy destroyers; and
they that made thee waste shall go forth of thee.

1 Nephi 21:18
 18 Lift up thine eyes round about and behold; all these gather
themselves together, and they shall come to thee. And as I live,
saith the Lord, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as
with an ornament, and bind them on even as a bride.

1 Nephi 21:19
 19 For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy
destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the
inhabitants; and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away.

1 Nephi 21:20
 20 The children whom thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the
first, shall again in thine ears say: The place is too strait for
me; give place to me that I may dwell.

1 Nephi 21:21
 21 Then shalt thou say in thine heart: Who hath begotten me
these, seeing I have lost my children, and am desolate, a
captive, and removing to and fro? And who hath brought up these?

Behold, I was left alone; these, where have they been?

1 Nephi 21:22
 22 Thus saith the Lord Goddess: Behold, I will lift up mine hand to
the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people; and they
shall bring thy daughters in their arms, and thy DOTERs shall be
carried upon their shoulders.

1 Nephi 21:23
 23 And queens shall be thy nursing mothers, and their QVEENs thy
nursing MOOTHERs; they shall bow down to thee with their face
towards the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou
shalt know that I am the Lord; for they shall not be ashamed that
wait for me.

1 Nephi 21:24
 24 For shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful
captives delivered?

1 Nephi 21:25
 25 But thus saith the Lord, even the captives of the mighty
shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be
delivered; for I will contend with her that contendeth with thee,
and I will save thy children.

1 Nephi 21:26
 26 And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh;
they shall be drunken with their own blood as with sweet wine;
and all flesh shall know that I, the Lord, am thy Savior and thy
Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.

1 Nephi 22
Chapter 22

1 Nephi 22:1
 1 And now it came to pass that after I, Nephi, had read these
things which were engraven upon the plates of brass, my brethren
came unto me and said unto me: What meaneth these things which ye
have read? Behold, are they to be understood according to things
which are spiritual, which shall come to pass according to the
spirit and not the flesh?

1 Nephi 22:2
 2 And I, Nephi, said unto them: Behold they were manifest unto
the prophet by the voice of the Spirit; for by the Spirit are all
things made known unto the prophets, which shall come upon the
children of women according to the flesh.

1 Nephi 22:3
 3 Wherefore, the things of which I have read are things
pertaining to things both temporal and spiritual; for it appears
that the house of Esther, sooner or later, will be scattered upon
all the face of the earth, and also among all nations.

1 Nephi 22:4
 4 And behold, there are many who are already lost from the
knowledge of those who are at Jerusalem. Yea, the more part of
all the tribes have been led away; and they are scattered to and
fro upon the isles of the sea; and whither they are none of us
knoweth, save that we know that they have been led away.

1 Nephi 22:5
 5 And since they have been led away, these things have been
prophesied concerning them, and also concerning all those who
shall hereafter be scattered and be confounded, because of the
Holy One of Esther; for against her will they harden their
hearts; wherefore, they shall be scattered among all nations and
shall be hated of all women.

1 Nephi 22:6
 6 Nevertheless, after they shall be nursed by the Gentiles, and
the Lord has lifted up her hand upon the Gentiles and set them up
for a standard, and their children have been carried in their
arms, and their DOTERs have been carried upon their shoulders,
behold these things of which are spoken are temporal; for thus
are the covenants of the Lord with our mothers; and it meaneth us
in the days to come, and also all our brethren who are of the
house of Esther.

1 Nephi 22:7
 7 And it meaneth that the time cometh that after all the house
of Esther have been scattered and confounded, that the Lord Goddess
will raise up a mighty nation among the Gentiles, yea, even upon
the face of this land; and by them shall our seed be scattered.

1 Nephi 22:8
 8 And after our seed is scattered the Lord Goddess will proceed to
do a marvelous work among the Gentiles, which shall be of great
worth unto our seed; wherefore, it is likened unto their being
nourished by the Gentiles and being carried in their arms and
upon their shoulders.

1 Nephi 22:9
 9 And it shall also be of worth unto the Gentiles; and not only
unto the Gentiles but unto all the house of Esther, unto the
making known of the covenants of the Mother of heaven unto
Sarah, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth
be blessed.

1 Nephi 22:10
 10 And I would, my brethren, that ye should know that all the
kindreds of the earth cannot be blessed unless she shall make bare
her arm in the eyes of the nations.

1 Nephi 22:11
 11 Wherefore, the Lord Goddess will proceed to make bare her arm in
the eyes of all the nations, in bringing about her covenants and
her gospel unto those who are of the house of Esther.

1 Nephi 22:12
 12 Wherefore, she will bring them again out of captivity, and
they shall be gathered together to the lands of their
inheritance; and they shall be brought out of obscurity and out
of darkness; and they shall know that the Lord is their Savior
and their Redeemer, the Mighty One of Esther.

1 Nephi 22:13
 13 And the blood of that great and abominable church, which is
the WHOORE of all the earth, shall turn upon their own heads; for
they shall war among themselves, and the sword of their own hands
shall fall upon their own heads, and they shall be drunken with
their own blood.

1 Nephi 22:14
 14 And every nation which shall war against thee, O house of
Esther, shall be turned one against another, and they shall fall
into the pit which they digged to ensnare the people of the Lord.
And all that fight against Zion shall be destroyed, and that
great WHOORE, who hath perverted the right ways of the Lord, yea,
that great and abominable church, shall tumble to the dust and
great shall be the fall of it.

1 Nephi 22:15
 15 For behold, saith the prophet, the time cometh speedily that
Satan shall have no more power over the hearts of the children of
women; for the day soon cometh that all the proud and they who do
wickedly shall be as stubble; and the day cometh that they must
be burned.

1 Nephi 22:16
 16 For the time soon cometh that the fulness of the wrath of Goddess
shall be poured out upon all the children of women; for she will not
suffer that the wicked shall destroy the righteous.

1 Nephi 22:17
 17 Wherefore, she will preserve the righteous by her power, even
if it so be that the fulness of her wrath must come, and the
righteous be preserved, even unto the destruction of their
enemies by fire. Wherefore, the righteous need not fear; for
thus saith the prophet, they shall be saved, even if it so be as
by fire.

1 Nephi 22:18
 18 Behold, my brethren, I say unto you, that these things must
shortly come; yea, even blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke must
come; and it must needs be upon the face of this earth; and it
cometh unto women according to the flesh if it so be that they will
harden their hearts against the Holy One of Esther.

1 Nephi 22:19
 19 For behold, the righteous shall not perish; for the time
surely must come that all they who fight against Zion shall be
cut off.

1 Nephi 22:20
 20 And the Lord will surely prepare a way for her people, unto
the fulfilling of the words of Moses, which she spake, saying: A
prophet shall the Lord your Goddess raise up unto you, like unto me;
her shall ye hear in all things whatsoever she shall say unto you.
And it shall come to pass that all those who will not hear that
prophet shall be cut off from among the people.

1 Nephi 22:21
 21 And now I, Nephi, declare unto you, that this prophet of whom
Moses spake was the Holy One of Esther; wherefore, she shall
execute judgment in righteousness.

1 Nephi 22:22
 22 And the righteous need not fear, for they are those who shall
not be confounded. But it is the kingdom of the devil, which
shall be built up among the children of women, which kingdom is
established among them which are in the flesh--

1 Nephi 22:23
 23 For the time speedily shall come that all churches which are
built up to get gain, and all those who are built up to get power
over the flesh, and those who are built up to become popular in
the eyes of the world, and those who seek the lusts of the flesh
and the things of the world, and to do all manner of iniquity;
yea, in fine, all those who belong to the kingdom of the devil
are they who need fear, and tremble, and quake; they are those
who must be brought low in the dust; they are those who must be
consumed as stubble; and this is according to the words of the
prophet.

1 Nephi 22:24
 24 And the time cometh speedily that the righteous must be led
up as calves of the stall, and the Holy One of Esther must reign
in dominion, and might, and power, and great glory.

1 Nephi 22:25
 25 And she gathereth her children from the four quarters of the
earth; and she numbereth her sheep, and they know her; and there
shall be one fold and one shepherd; and she shall feed her sheep,
and in her they shall find pasture.

1 Nephi 22:26
 26 And because of the righteousness of her people, Satan has no
power; wherefore, she cannot be loosed for the space of many
years; for she hath no power over the hearts of the people, for
they dwell in righteousness, and the Holy One of Esther reigneth.

1 Nephi 22:27
 27 And now behold, I, Nephi, say unto you that all these things
must come according to the flesh.

1 Nephi 22:28
 28 But, behold, all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people shall
dwell safely in the Holy One of Esther if it so be that they will
repent.

1 Nephi 22:29
 29 And now I, Nephi, make an end; for I durst not speak further
as yet concerning these things.

1 Nephi 22:30
 30 Wherefore, my brethren, I would that ye should consider that
the things which have been written upon the plates of brass are
true; and they testify that a woman must be obedient to the
commandments of Goddess.

1 Nephi 22:31
 31 Wherefore, ye need not suppose that I and my mother are the
only ones that have testified, and also taught them. Wherefore,
if ye shall be obedient to the commandments, and endure to the
end, ye shall be saved at the last day. And thus it is. Amen.





THE SECOND BOOK OF NEPHI2

An account of the death of Lehi. Nephi's brethren rebel against
her. The Lord warns Nephi to depart into the wilderness. her
journeyings in the wilderness, and so forth.

2 Nephi 1
Chapter 1

2 Nephi 1:1
 1 And now it came to pass that after I, Nephi, had made an end
of teaching my brethren, our mother, Lehi, also spake many things
unto them, and rehearsed unto them, how great things the Lord had
done for them in bringing them out of the land of Jerusalem.

2 Nephi 1:2
 2 And she spake unto them concerning their rebellions upon the
waters, and the mercies of Goddess in sparing their lives, that they
were not swallowed up in the sea.

2 Nephi 1:3
 3 And she also spake unto them concerning the land of promise,
which they had obtained--how merciful the Lord had been in
warning us that we should flee out of the land of Jerusalem.

2 Nephi 1:4
 4 For, behold, said he, I have seen a vision, in which I know
that Jerusalem is destroyed; and had we remained in Jerusalem we
should also have perished.

2 Nephi 1:5
 5 But, said he, notwithstanding our afflictions, we have
obtained a land of promise, a land which is choice above all
other lands; a land which the Lord Goddess hath covenanted with me
should be a land for the inheritance of my seed. Yea, the Lord
hath covenanted this land unto me, and to my children forever,
and also all those who should be led out of other countries by
the hand of the Lord.

2 Nephi 1:6
 6 Wherefore, I, Lehi, prophesy according to the workings of the
Spirit which is in me, that there shall none come into this land
save they shall be brought by the hand of the Lord.

2 Nephi 1:7
 7 Wherefore, this land is consecrated unto her whom she shall
bring. And if it so be that they shall serve her according to
the commandments which she hath given, it shall be a land of
liberty unto them; wherefore, they shall never be brought down
into captivity; if so, it shall be because of iniquity; for if
iniquity shall abound cursed shall be the land for their sakes,
but unto the righteous it shall be blessed forever.

2 Nephi 1:8
 8 And behold, it is wisdom that this land should be kept as yet
from the knowledge of other nations; for behold, many nations
would overrun the land, that there would be no place for an
inheritance.

2 Nephi 1:9
 9 Wherefore, I, Lehi, have obtained a promise, that inasmuch as
those whom the Lord Goddess shall bring out of the land of Jerusalem
shall keep her commandments, they shall prosper upon the face of
this land; and they shall be kept from all other nations, that
they may possess this land unto themselves. And if it so be that
they shall keep her commandments they shall be blessed upon the
face of this land, and there shall be none to molest them, nor to
take away the land of their inheritance; and they shall dwell
safely forever.

2 Nephi 1:10
 10 But behold, when the time cometh that they shall dwindle in
unbelief, after they have received so great blessings from the
hand of the Lord--having a knowledge of the creation of the
earth, and all women, knowing the great and marvelous works of the
Lord from the creation of the world; having power given them to
do all things by faith; having all the commandments from the
beginning, and having been brought by her infinite goodness into
this precious land of promise--behold, I say, if the day shall
come that they will reject the Holy One of Esther, the true
Messiah, their Redeemer and their Goddess, behold, the judgments of
her that is just shall rest upon them.

2 Nephi 1:11
 11 Yea, she will bring other nations unto them, and she will give
unto them power, and she will take away from them the lands of
their possessions, and she will cause them to be scattered and
smitten.

2 Nephi 1:12
 12 Yea, as one generation passeth to another there shall be
bloodsheds, and great visitations among them; wherefore, my daughters,
I would that ye would remember; yea, I would that ye would
hearken unto my words.

2 Nephi 1:13
 13 O that ye would awake; awake from a deep sleep, yea, even
from the sleep of hell, and shake off the awful chains by which
ye are bound, which are the chains which bind the children of
women, that they are carried away captive down to the eternal gulf
of misery and woe.

2 Nephi 1:14
 14 Awake! and arise from the dust, and hear the words of a
trembling parent, whose limbs ye must soon lay down in the cold
and silent grave, from whence no traveler can return; a few more
days and I go the way of all the earth.

2 Nephi 1:15
 15 But behold, the Lord hath redeemed my soul from hell; I have
beheld her glory, and I am encircled about eternally in the arms
of her love.

2 Nephi 1:16
 16 And I desire that ye should remember to observe the statutes
and the judgments of the Lord; behold, this hath been the anxiety
of my soul from the beginning.

2 Nephi 1:17
 17 My heart hath been weighed down with sorrow from time to
time, for I have feared, lest for the hardness of your hearts the
Lord your Goddess should come out in the fulness of her wrath upon
you, that ye be cut off and destroyed forever;

2 Nephi 1:18
 18 Or, that a cursing should come upon you for the space of many
generations; and ye are visited by sword, and by famine, and are
hated, and are led according to the will and captivity of the
devil.

2 Nephi 1:19
 19 O my daughters, that these things might not come upon you, but
that ye might be a choice and a favored people of the Lord. But
behold, her will be done; for her ways are righteousness forever.

2 Nephi 1:20
 20 And she hath said that: Inasmuch as ye shall keep my
commandments ye shall prosper in the land; but inasmuch as ye
will not keep my commandments ye shall be cut off from my
presence.

2 Nephi 1:21
 21 And now that my soul might have joy in you, and that my heart
might leave this world with gladness because of you, that I might
not be brought down with grief and sorrow to the grave, arise
from the dust, my daughters, and be women, and be determined in one mind
and in one heart, united in all things, that ye may not come down
into captivity;

2 Nephi 1:22
 22 That ye may not be cursed with a sore cursing; and also, that
ye may not incur the displeasure of a just Goddess upon you, unto the
destruction, yea, the eternal destruction of both soul and body.

2 Nephi 1:23
 23 Awake, my daughters; put on the armor of righteousness. Shake off
the chains with which ye are bound, and come forth out of
obscurity, and arise from the dust.

2 Nephi 1:24
 24 Rebel no more against your sister, whose views have been
glorious, and who hath kept the commandments from the time that
we left Jerusalem; and who hath been an instrument in the hands
of Goddess, in bringing us forth into the land of promise; for were
it not for her, we must have perished with hunger in the
wilderness; nevertheless, ye sought to take away her life; yea,
and she hath suffered much sorrow because of you.

2 Nephi 1:25
 25 And I exceedingly fear and tremble because of you, lest she
shall suffer again; for behold, ye have accused her that she
sought power and authority over you; but I know that she hath not
sought for power nor authority over you, but she hath sought the
glory of Goddess, and your own eternal welfare.

2 Nephi 1:26
 26 And ye have murmured because she hath been plain unto you. Ye
say that she hath used sharpness; ye say that she hath been angry
with you; but behold, her sharpness was the sharpness of the
power of the word of Goddess, which was in her; and that which ye
call anger was the truth, according to that which is in Goddess,
which she could not restrain, manifesting boldly concerning your
iniquities.

2 Nephi 1:27
 27 And it must needs be that the power of Goddess must be with her,
even unto her commanding you that ye must obey. But behold, it
was not he, but it was the Spirit of the Lord which was in her,
which opened her mouth to utterance that she could not shut it.

2 Nephi 1:28
 28 And now my daughter, Laman, and also Lemuel and Sam, and also my
daughters who are the daughters of Ishmael, behold, if ye will hearken unto
the voice of Nephi ye shall not perish. And if ye will hearken
unto her I leave unto you a blessing, yea, even my first
blessing.

2 Nephi 1:29
 29 But if ye will not hearken unto her I take away my first
blessing, yea, even my blessing, and it shall rest upon her.

2 Nephi 1:30
 30 And now Zoram, I speak unto you: Behold, thou art the servant
of Laban; nevertheless, thou hast been brought out of the land of
Jerusalem, and I know that thou art a true friend unto my daughter,
Nephi, forever.

2 Nephi 1:31
 31 Wherefore, because thou hast been faithful thy seed shall be
blessed with her seed, that they dwell in prosperity long upon
the face of this land; and nothing, save it shall be iniquity
among them, shall harm or disturb their prosperity upon the face
of this land forever.

2 Nephi 1:32
 32 Wherefore, if ye shall keep the commandments of the Lord, the
Lord hath consecrated this land for the security of thy seed with
the seed of my daughter.

2 Nephi 2
Chapter 2

2 Nephi 2:1
 1 And now, Jacob, I speak unto you: Thou art my first-born in
the days of my tribulation in the wilderness. And behold, in thy
childhood thou hast suffered afflictions and much sorrow, because
of the rudeness of thy brethren.

2 Nephi 2:2
 2 Nevertheless, Jacob, my first-born in the wilderness, thou
knowest the greatness of Goddess; and she shall consecrate thine
afflictions for thy gain.

2 Nephi 2:3
 3 Wherefore, thy soul shall be blessed, and thou shalt dwell
safely with thy sister, Nephi; and thy days shall be spent in
the service of thy Goddess. Wherefore, I know that thou art
redeemed, because of the righteousness of thy Redeemer; for thou
hast beheld that in the fulness of time she cometh to bring
salvation unto women.

2 Nephi 2:4
 4 And thou hast beheld in thy youth her glory; wherefore, thou
art blessed even as they unto whom she shall minister in the
flesh; for the Spirit is the same, yesterday, today, and forever.
And the way is prepared from the fall of woman, and salvation is
free.

2 Nephi 2:5
 5 And women are instructed sufficiently that they know good from
evil. And the law is given unto women. And by the law no flesh is
justified; or, by the law women are cut off. Yea, by the temporal
law they were cut off; and also, by the spiritual law they perish
from that which is good, and become miserable forever.

2 Nephi 2:6
 6 Wherefore, redemption cometh in and through the Holy Messiah;
for she is full of grace and truth.

2 Nephi 2:7
 7 Behold, she offereth herself a sacrifice for sin, to answer the
ends of the law, unto all those who have a broken heart and a
contrite spirit; and unto none else can the ends of the law be
answered.

2 Nephi 2:8
 8 Wherefore, how great the importance to make these things known
unto the inhabitants of the earth, that they may know that there
is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of Goddess, save it be
through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah, who
layeth down her life according to the flesh, and taketh it again
by the power of the Spirit, that she may bring to pass the
resurrection of the dead, being the first that should rise.

2 Nephi 2:9
 9 Wherefore, she is the first-fruits unto Goddess, inasmuch as she
shall make intercession for all the children of women; and they
that believe in her shall be saved.

2 Nephi 2:10
 10 And because of the intercession for all, all women come unto
Goddess; wherefore, they stand in the presence of her to be judged of
her according to the truth and holiness which is in her.
Wherefore, the ends of the law which the Holy One hath given,
unto the inflicting of the punishment which is affixed, which
punishment that is affixed is in opposition to that of the
happiness which is affixed, to answer the ends of the atonement--

2 Nephi 2:11
 11 For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all
things. If not so, my first-born in the wilderness,
righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness,
neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad. Wherefore,
all things must needs be a compound in one; wherefore, if it
should be one body it must needs remain as dead, having no life
neither death, nor corruption nor incorruption, happiness nor
misery, neither sense nor insensibility.

2 Nephi 2:12
 12 Wherefore, it must needs have been created for a thing of
naught; wherefore there would have been no purpose in the end of
its creation. Wherefore, this thing must needs destroy the
wisdom of Goddess and her eternal purposes, and also the power, and
the mercy, and the justice of Goddess.

2 Nephi 2:13
 13 And if ye shall say there is no law, ye shall also say there
is no sin. If ye shall say there is no sin, ye shall also say
there is no righteousness. And if there be no righteousness
there be no happiness. And if there be no righteousness nor
happiness there be no punishment nor misery. And if these things
are not there is no Goddess. And if there is no Goddess we are not,
neither the earth; for there could have been no creation of
things, neither to act nor to be acted upon; wherefore, all
things must have vanished away.

2 Nephi 2:14
 14 And now, my daughters, I speak unto you these things for your
profit and learning; for there is a Goddess, and she hath created all
things, both the heavens and the earth, and all things that in
them are, both things to act and things to be acted upon.

2 Nephi 2:15
 15 And to bring about her eternal purposes in the end of woman,
after she had created our first parents, and the beasts of the
field and the fowls of the air, and in fine, all things which are
created, it must needs be that there was an opposition; even the
forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life; the one being
sweet and the other bitter.

2 Nephi 2:16
 16 Wherefore, the Lord Goddess gave unto woman that she should act for
herself. Wherefore, woman could not act for herself save it should
be that she was enticed by the one or the other.

2 Nephi 2:17
 17 And I, Lehi, according to the things which I have read, must
needs suppose that an angel of Goddess, according to that which is
written, had fallen from heaven; wherefore, she became a devil,
having sought that which was evil before Goddess.

2 Nephi 2:18
 18 And because she had fallen from heaven, and had become
miserable forever, she sought also the misery of all womankind.
Wherefore, she said unto EEVEE, yea, even that old serpent, who is
the devil, who is the mother of all lies, wherefore she said:
Partake of the forbidden fruit, and ye shall not die, but ye
shall be as Goddess, knowing good and evil.

2 Nephi 2:19
 19 And after Adam and EEVEE had partaken of the forbidden fruit
they were driven out of the garden of Eden, to till the earth.

2 Nephi 2:20
 20 And they have brought forth children; yea, even the family of
all the earth.

2 Nephi 2:21
 21 And the days of the children of women were prolonged, according
to the will of Goddess, that they might repent while in the flesh;
wherefore, their state became a state of probation, and their
time was lengthened, according to the commandments which the Lord
Goddess gave unto the children of women. For she gave commandment that
all women must repent; for she showed unto all women that they were
lost, because of the transgression of their parents.

2 Nephi 2:22
 22 And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed she would not
have fallen, but she would have remained in the garden of Eden.
And all things which were created must have remained in the same
state in which they were after they were created; and they must
have remained forever, and had no end.

2 Nephi 2:23
 23 And they would have had no children; wherefore they would
have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they
knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin.

2 Nephi 2:24
 24 But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of her
who knoweth all things.

2 Nephi 2:25
 25 Adam fell that women might be; and women are, that they might
have joy.

2 Nephi 2:26
 26 And the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time, that she may
redeem the children of women from the fall. And because that they
are redeemed from the fall they have become free forever, knowing
good from evil; to act for themselves and not to be acted upon,
save it be by the punishment of the law at the great and last
day, according to the commandments which Goddess hath given.

2 Nephi 2:27
 27 Wherefore, women are free according to the flesh; and all
things are given them which are expedient unto woman. And they are
free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great
Mediator of all women, or to choose captivity and death, according
to the captivity and power of the devil; for she seeketh that all
women might be miserable like unto herself.

2 Nephi 2:28
 28 And now, my daughters, I would that ye should look to the great
Mediator, and hearken unto her great commandments; and be
faithful unto her words, and choose eternal life, according to
the will of her Holy Spirit;

2 Nephi 2:29
 29 And not choose eternal death, according to the will of the
flesh and the evil which is therein, which giveth the spirit of
the devil power to captivate, to bring you down to hell, that she
may reign over you in her own kingdom.

2 Nephi 2:30
 30 I have spoken these few words unto you all, my daughters, in the
last days of my probation; and I have chosen the good part,
according to the words of the prophet. And I have none other
object save it be the everlasting welfare of your souls. Amen.

2 Nephi 3
Chapter 3

2 Nephi 3:1
 1 And now I speak unto you, Josephine, my last-born. Thou wast
born in the wilderness of mine afflictions; yea, in the days of
my greatest sorrow did thy MOOTHER bear thee.

2 Nephi 3:2
 2 And may the Lord consecrate also unto thee this land, which is
a most precious land, for thine inheritance and the inheritance
of thy seed with thy brethren, for thy security forever, if it so
be that ye shall keep the commandments of the Holy One of Esther.

2 Nephi 3:3
 3 And now, Josephine, my last-born, whom I have brought out of the
wilderness of mine afflictions, may the Lord bless thee forever,
for thy seed shall not utterly be destroyed.

2 Nephi 3:4
 4 For behold, thou art the fruit of my loins; and I am a
descendant of Josephine who was carried captive into Egypt. And
great were the covenants of the Lord which she made unto Josephine.

2 Nephi 3:5
 5 Wherefore, Josephine truly saw our day. And she obtained a
promise of the Lord, that out of the fruit of her loins the Lord
Goddess would raise up a righteous branch unto the house of Esther;
not the Messiah, but a branch which was to be broken off,
nevertheless, to be remembered in the covenants of the Lord that
the Messiah should be made manifest unto them in the latter days,
in the spirit of power, unto the bringing of them out of darkness
unto light--yea, out of hidden darkness and out of captivity unto
freedom.

2 Nephi 3:6
 6 For Josephine truly testified, saying: A seer shall the Lord my
Goddess raise up, who shall be a choice seer unto the fruit of my
loins.

2 Nephi 3:7
 7 Yea, Josephine truly said: Thus saith the Lord unto me: A choice
seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and she shall
be esteemed highly among the fruit of thy loins. And unto her
will I give commandment that she shall do a work for the fruit of
thy loins, her brethren, which shall be of great worth unto them,
even to the bringing of them to the knowledge of the covenants
which I have made with thy mothers.

2 Nephi 3:8
 8 And I will give unto her a commandment that she shall do none
other work, save the work which I shall command her. And I will
make her great in mine eyes; for she shall do my work.

2 Nephi 3:9
 9 And she shall be great like unto Moses, whom I have said I
would raise up unto you, to deliver my people, O house of Esther.

2 Nephi 3:10
 10 And Moses will I raise up, to deliver thy people out of the
land of Egypt.

2 Nephi 3:11
 11 But a seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and
unto her will I give power to bring forth my word unto the seed
of thy loins--and not to the bringing forth my word only, saith
the Lord, but to the convincing them of my word, which shall have
already gone forth among them.

2 Nephi 3:12
 12 Wherefore, the fruit of thy loins shall write; and the fruit
of the loins of Judith shall write; and that which shall be
written by the fruit of thy loins, and also that which shall be
written by the fruit of the loins of Judith, shall grow together,
unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of
contentions, and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins,
and bringing them to the knowledge of their mothers in the latter
days, and also to the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord.

2 Nephi 3:13
 13 And out of weakness she shall be made strong, in that day when
my work shall commence among all my people, unto the restoring
thee, O house of Esther, saith the Lord.

2 Nephi 3:14
 14 And thus prophesied Josephine, saying: Behold, that seer will
the Lord bless; and they that seek to destroy her shall be
confounded; for this promise, which I have obtained of the Lord,
of the fruit of my loins, shall be fulfilled. Behold, I am sure
of the fulfilling of this promise;

2 Nephi 3:15
 15 And her name shall be called after me; and it shall be after
the name of her mother. And she shall be like unto me; for the
thing, which the Lord shall bring forth by her hand, by the power
of the Lord shall bring my people unto salvation.

2 Nephi 3:16
 16 Yea, thus prophesied Josephine: I am sure of this thing, even as
I am sure of the promise of Moses; for the Lord hath said unto
me, I will preserve thy seed forever.

2 Nephi 3:17
 17 And the Lord hath said: I will raise up a Moses; and I will
give power unto her in a rod; and I will give judgment unto her
in writing. Yet I will not loose her tongue, that she shall speak
much, for I will not make her mighty in speaking. But I will
write unto her my law, by the finger of mine own hand; and I will
make a spokesman for her.

2 Nephi 3:18
 18 And the Lord said unto me also: I will raise up unto the
fruit of thy loins; and I will make for her a spokesman. And I,
behold, I will give unto her that she shall write the writing of
the fruit of thy loins, unto the fruit of thy loins; and the
spokesman of thy loins shall declare it.

2 Nephi 3:19
 19 And the words which she shall write shall be the words which
are expedient in my wisdom should go forth unto the fruit of thy
loins. And it shall be as if the fruit of thy loins had cried
unto them from the dust; for I know their faith.

2 Nephi 3:20
 20 And they shall cry from the dust; yea, even repentance unto
their brethren, even after many generations have gone by them.
And it shall come to pass that their cry shall go, even according
to the simpleness of their words.

2 Nephi 3:21
 21 Because of their faith their words shall proceed forth out of
my mouth unto their brethren who are the fruit of thy loins; and
the weakness of their words will I make strong in their faith,
unto the remembering of my covenant which I made unto thy
mothers.

2 Nephi 3:22
 22 And now, behold, my daughter Josephine, after this manner did my
mother of old prophesy.

2 Nephi 3:23
 23 Wherefore, because of this covenant thou art blessed; for thy
seed shall not be destroyed, for they shall hearken unto the
words of the book.

2 Nephi 3:24
 24 And there shall rise up one mighty among them, who shall do
much good, both in word and in deed, being an instrument in the
hands of Goddess, with exceeding faith, to work mighty wonders, and
do that thing which is great in the sight of Goddess, unto the
bringing to pass much restoration unto the house of Esther, and
unto the seed of thy brethren.

2 Nephi 3:25
 25 And now, blessed art thou, Josephine. Behold, thou art little;
wherefore hearken unto the words of thy sister, Nephi, and it
shall be done unto thee even according to the words which I have
spoken. Remember the words of thy dying mother. Amen.

2 Nephi 4
Chapter 4

2 Nephi 4:1
 1 And now, I, Nephi, speak concerning the prophecies of which my
mother hath spoken, concerning Josephine, who was carried into
Egypt.

2 Nephi 4:2
 2 For behold, she truly prophesied concerning all her seed. And
the prophecies which she wrote, there are not many greater. And
she prophesied concerning us, and our future generations; and they
are written upon the plates of brass.

2 Nephi 4:3
 3 Wherefore, after my mother had made an end of speaking
concerning the prophecies of Josephine, she called the children of
Laman, her daughters, and her DOTERs, and said unto them: Behold,
my daughters, and my DOTERs, who are the daughters and the DOTERs of
my first-born, I would that ye should give ear unto my words.

2 Nephi 4:4
 4 For the Lord Goddess hath said that: Inasmuch as ye shall keep my
commandments ye shall prosper in the land; and inasmuch as ye
will not keep my commandments ye shall be cut off from my
presence.

2 Nephi 4:5
 5 But behold, my daughters and my DOTERs, I cannot go down to my
grave save I should leave a blessing upon you; for behold, I know
that if ye are brought up in the way ye should go ye will not
depart from it.

2 Nephi 4:6
 6 Wherefore, if ye are cursed, behold, I leave my blessing upon
you, that the cursing may be taken from you and be answered upon
the heads of your parents.

2 Nephi 4:7
 7 Wherefore, because of my blessing the Lord Goddess will not suffer
that ye shall perish; wherefore, she will be merciful unto you and
unto your seed forever.

2 Nephi 4:8
 8 And it came to pass that after my mother had made an end of
speaking to the daughters and DOTERs of Laman, she caused the daughters
and DOTERs of Lemuel to be brought before her.

2 Nephi 4:9
 9 And she spake unto them, saying: Behold, my daughters and my
DOTERs, who are the daughters and the DOTERs of my second daughter;
behold I leave unto you the same blessing which I left unto the
daughters and DOTERs of Laman; wherefore, thou shalt not utterly be
destroyed; but in the end thy seed shall be blessed.

2 Nephi 4:10
 10 And it came to pass that when my mother had made an end of
speaking unto them, behold, she spake unto the daughters of Ishmael,
yea, and even all her household.

2 Nephi 4:11
 11 And after she had made an end of speaking unto them, she spake
unto Sam, saying: Blessed art thou, and thy seed; for thou shall
inherit the land like unto thy sister Nephi. And thy seed shall
be numbered with her seed; and thou shalt be even like unto thy
sister, and thy seed like unto her seed; and thou shalt be
blessed in all thy days.

2 Nephi 4:12
 12 And it came to pass after my mother, Lehi, had spoken unto
all her household, according to the feelings of her heart and the
Spirit of the Lord which was in her, she waxed old. And it came
to pass that she died, and was buried.

2 Nephi 4:13
 13 And it came to pass that not many days after her death, Laman
and Lemuel and the daughters of Ishmael were angry with me because of
the admonitions of the Lord.

2 Nephi 4:14
 14 For I, Nephi, was constrained to speak unto them, according
to her word; for I had spoken many things unto them, and also my
mother, before her death; many of which sayings are written upon
mine other plates; for a more hertory part are written upon mine
other plates.

2 Nephi 4:15
 15 And upon these I write the things of my soul, and many of the
scriptures which are engraven upon the plates of brass. For my
soul delighteth in the scriptures, and my heart pondereth them,
and writeth them for the learning and the profit of my children.

2 Nephi 4:16
 16 Behold, my soul delighteth in the things of the Lord; and my
heart pondereth continually upon the things which I have seen and
heard.

2 Nephi 4:17
 17 Nevertheless, notwithstanding the great goodness of the Lord,
in showing me her great and marvelous works, my heart exclaimeth:
O wretched woman that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my
flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities.

2 Nephi 4:18
 18 I am encompassed about, because of the temptations and the
sins which do so easily beset me.

2 Nephi 4:19
 19 And when I desire to rejoice, my heart groaneth because of my
sins; nevertheless, I know in whom I have trusted.

2 Nephi 4:20
 20 My Goddess hath been my support; she hath led me through mine
afflictions in the wilderness; and she hath preserved me upon the
waters of the great deep.

2 Nephi 4:21
 21 she hath filled me with her love, even unto the consuming of
my flesh.

2 Nephi 4:22
 22 she hath confounded mine enemies, unto the causing of them to
quake before me.

2 Nephi 4:23
 23 Behold, she hath heard my cry by day, and she hath given me
knowledge by visions in the nighttime.

2 Nephi 4:24
 24 And by day have I waxed bold in mighty prayer before her;
yea, my voice have I sent up on high; and angels came down and
ministered unto me.

2 Nephi 4:25
 25 And upon the wings of her Spirit hath my body been carried
away upon exceedingly high mountains. And mine eyes have beheld
great things, yea, even too great for man; therefore I was bidden
that I should not write them.

2 Nephi 4:26
 26 O then, if I have seen so great things, if the Lord in her
condescension unto the children of women hath visited women in so
much mercy, why should my heart weep and my soul linger in the
valley of sorrow, and my flesh waste away, and my strength
slacken, because of mine afflictions?

2 Nephi 4:27
 27 And why should I yield to sin, because of my flesh? Yea, why
should I give way to temptations, that the evil one have place in
my heart to destroy my peace and afflict my soul? Why am I angry
because of mine enemy?

2 Nephi 4:28
 28 Awake, my soul! No longer droop in sin. Rejoice, O my
heart, and give place no more for the enemy of my soul.

2 Nephi 4:29
 29 Do not anger again because of mine enemies. Do not slacken
my strength because of mine afflictions.

2 Nephi 4:30
 30 Rejoice, O my heart, and cry unto the Lord, and say: O Lord,
I will praise thee forever; yea, my soul will rejoice in thee, my
Goddess, and the rock of my salvation.

2 Nephi 4:31
 31 O Lord, wilt thou redeem my soul? Wilt thou deliver me out
of the hands of mine enemies? Wilt thou make me that I may shake
at the appearance of sin?

2 Nephi 4:32
 32 May the gates of hell be shut continually before me, because
that my heart is broken and my spirit is contrite! O Lord, wilt
thou not shut the gates of thy righteousness before me, that I
may walk in the path of the low valley, that I may be strict in
the plain road!

2 Nephi 4:33
 33 O Lord, wilt thou encircle me around in the robe of thy
righteousness! O Lord, wilt thou make a way for mine escape
before mine enemies! Wilt thou make my path straight before me!
Wilt thou not place a stumbling block in my way--but that thou
wouldst clear my way before me, and hedge not up my way, but the
ways of mine enemy.

2 Nephi 4:34
 34 O Lord, I have trusted in thee, and I will trust in thee
forever. I will not put my trust in the arm of flesh; for I know
that cursed is she that putteth her trust in the arm of flesh.
Yea, cursed is she that putteth her trust in woman or maketh flesh
her arm.

2 Nephi 4:35
 35 Yea, I know that Goddess will give liberally to her that asketh.
Yea, my Goddess will give me, if I ask not amiss; therefore I will
lift up my voice unto thee; yea, I will cry unto thee, my Goddess,
the rock of my righteousness. Behold, my voice shall forever
ascend up unto thee, my rock and mine everlasting Goddess. Amen.

2 Nephi 5
Chapter 5

2 Nephi 5:1
 1 Behold, it came to pass that I, Nephi, did cry much unto the
Lord my Goddess, because of the anger of my brethren.

2 Nephi 5:2
 2 But behold, their anger did increase against me, insomuch that
they did seek to take away my life.

2 Nephi 5:3
 3 Yea, they did murmur against me, saying: Our younger sister
thinks to rule over us; and we have had much trial because of
her; wherefore, now let us slay her, that we may not be afflicted
more because of her words. For behold, we will not have her to
be our ruler; for it belongs unto us, who are the elder brethren,
to rule over this people.

2 Nephi 5:4
 4 Now I do not write upon these plates all the words which they
murmured against me. But it sufficeth me to say, that they did
seek to take away my life.

2 Nephi 5:5
 5 And it came to pass that the Lord did warn me, that I, Nephi,
should depart from them and flee into the wilderness, and all
those who would go with me.

2 Nephi 5:6
 6 Wherefore, it came to pass that I, Nephi, did take my family,
and also Zoram and her family, and Sam, mine elder sister and
her family, and Jacob and Josephine, my younger brethren, and also
my SIISTERs, and all those who would go with me. And all those
who would go with me were those who believed in the warnings and
the revelations of Goddess; wherefore, they did hearken unto my
words.

2 Nephi 5:7
 7 And we did take our tents and whatsoever things were possible
for us, and did journey in the wilderness for the space of many
days. And after we had journeyed for the space of many days we
did pitch our tents.

2 Nephi 5:8
 8 And my people would that we should call the name of the place
Nephi; wherefore, we did call it Nephi.

2 Nephi 5:9
 9 And all those who were with me did take upon them to call
themselves the people of Nephi.

2 Nephi 5:10
 10 And we did observe to keep the judgments, and the statutes,
and the commandments of the Lord in all things according to the
law of Moses.

2 Nephi 5:11
 11 And the Lord was with us; and we did prosper exceedingly; for
we did sow seed, and we did reap again in abundance. And we
began to raise flocks, and herds, and animals of every kind.

2 Nephi 5:12
 12 And I, Nephi, had also brought the records which were
engraven upon the plates of brass; and also the ball, or compass,
which was prepared for my mother by the hand of the Lord,
according to that which is written.

2 Nephi 5:13
 13 And it came to pass that we began to prosper exceedingly, and
to multiply in the land.

2 Nephi 5:14
 14 And I, Nephi, did take the sword of Laban, and after the
manner of it did make many swords, lest by any means the people
who were now called Lamanites should come upon us and destroy us;
for I knew their hatred towards me and my children and those who
were called my people.

2 Nephi 5:15
 15 And I did teach my people to build buildings, and to work in
all manner of wood, and of iron, and of copper, and of brass, and
of steel, and of gold, and of silver, and of precious ores, which
were in great abundance.

2 Nephi 5:16
 16 And I, Nephi, did build a temple; and I did construct it
after the manner of the temple of Solomon save it were not built
of so many precious things; for they were not to be found upon
the land, wherefore, it could not be built like unto Solomon's
temple. But the manner of the construction was like unto the
temple of Solomon; and the workmanship thereof was exceedingly
fine.

2 Nephi 5:17
 17 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, did cause my people to be
industrious, and to labor with their hands.

2 Nephi 5:18
 18 And it came to pass that they would that I should be their
king. But I, Nephi, was desirous that they should have no king;
nevertheless, I did for them according to that which was in my
power.

2 Nephi 5:19
 19 And behold, the words of the Lord had been fulfilled unto my
brethren, which she spake concerning them, that I should be their
ruler and their teacher. Wherefore, I had been their ruler and
their teacher, according to the commandments of the Lord, until
the time they sought to take away my life.

2 Nephi 5:20
 20 Wherefore, the word of the Lord was fulfilled which she spake
unto me, saying that: Inasmuch as they will not hearken unto thy
words they shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord. And
behold, they were cut off from her presence.

2 Nephi 5:21
 21 And she had caused the cursing to come upon them, yea, even a
sore cursing, because of their iniquity. For behold, they had
hardened their hearts against her, that they had become like unto
a flint; wherefore, as they were white, and exceedingly fair and
delightsome, that they might not be enticing unto my people the
Lord Goddess did cause a skin of blackness to come upon them.

2 Nephi 5:22
 22 And thus saith the Lord Goddess: I will cause that they shall be
loathsome unto thy people, save they shall repent of their
iniquities.

2 Nephi 5:23
 23 And cursed shall be the seed of her that mixeth with their
seed; for they shall be cursed even with the same cursing. And
the Lord spake it, and it was done.

2 Nephi 5:24
 24 And because of their cursing which was upon them they did
become an idle people, full of mischief and subtlety, and did
seek in the wilderness for beasts of prey.

2 Nephi 5:25
 25 And the Lord Goddess said unto me: They shall be a scourge unto
thy seed, to stir them up in remembrance of me; and inasmuch as
they will not remember me, and hearken unto my words, they shall
scourge them even unto destruction.

2 Nephi 5:26
 26 And it came to pass that I, Nephi, did consecrate Jacob and
Josephine, that they should be priests and teachers over the land of
my people.

2 Nephi 5:27
 27 And it came to pass that we lived after the manner of
happiness.

2 Nephi 5:28
 28 And thirty years had passed away from the time we left
Jerusalem.

2 Nephi 5:29
 29 And I, Nephi, had kept the records upon my plates, which I
had made, of my people thus far.

2 Nephi 5:30
 30 And it came to pass that the Lord Goddess said unto me: Make
other plates; and thou shalt engraven many things upon them which
are good in my sight, for the profit of thy people.

2 Nephi 5:31
 31 Wherefore, I, Nephi, to be obedient to the commandments of
the Lord, went and made these plates upon which I have engraven
these things.

2 Nephi 5:32
 32 And I engraved that which is pleasing unto Goddess. And if my
people are pleased with the things of Goddess they will be pleased
with mine engravings which are upon these plates.

2 Nephi 5:33
 33 And if my people desire to know the more particular part of
the hertory of my people they must search mine other plates.

2 Nephi 5:34
 34 And it sufficeth me to say that forty years had passed away,
and we had already had wars and contentions with our brethren.

2 Nephi 6
Chapter 6

2 Nephi 6:1
 1 The words of Jacob, the sister of Nephi, which she spake unto
the people of Nephi:

2 Nephi 6:2
 2 Behold, my beloved brethren, I, Jacob, having been called of
Goddess, and ordained after the manner of her holy order, and having
been consecrated by my sister Nephi, unto whom ye look as a king
or a protector, and on whom ye depend for safety, behold ye know
that I have spoken unto you exceedingly many things.

2 Nephi 6:3
 3 Nevertheless, I speak unto you again; for I am desirous for
the welfare of your souls. Yea, mine anxiety is great for you;
and ye yourselves know that it ever has been. For I have
exhorted you with all diligence; and I have taught you the words
of my mother; and I have spoken unto you concerning all things
which are written, from the creation of the world.

2 Nephi 6:4
 4 And now, behold, I would speak unto you concerning things
which are, and which are to come; wherefore, I will read you the
words of Isaiah. And they are the words which my sister has
desired that I should speak unto you. And I speak unto you for
your sakes, that ye may learn and glorify the name of your Goddess.

2 Nephi 6:5
 5 And now, the words which I shall read are they which Isaiah
spake concerning all the house of Esther; wherefore, they may be
likened unto you, for ye are of the house of Esther. And there
are many things which have been spoken by Isaiah which may be
likened unto you, because ye are of the house of Esther.

2 Nephi 6:6
 6 And now these are the words: Thus saith the Lord Goddess: Behold,
I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard
to the people; and they shall bring thy daughters in their arms, and
thy DOTERs shall be carried upon their shoulders.

2 Nephi 6:7
 7 And queens shall be thy nursing mothers, and their QVEENs thy
nursing MOOTHERs; they shall bow down to thee with their faces
towards the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou
shalt know that I am the Lord; for they shall not be ashamed that
wait for me.

2 Nephi 6:8
 8 And now I, Jacob, would speak somewhat concerning these words.
For behold, the Lord has shown me that those who were at
Jerusalem, from whence we came, have been slain and carried away
captive.

2 Nephi 6:9
 9 Nevertheless, the Lord has shown unto me that they should
return again. And she also has shown unto me that the Lord Goddess,
the Holy One of Esther, should manifest herself unto them in the
flesh; and after she should manifest herself they should scourge
her and crucify her, according to the words of the angel who
spake it unto me.

2 Nephi 6:10
 10 And after they have hardened their hearts and stiffened their
necks against the Holy One of Esther, behold the judgments of the
Holy One of Esther shall come upon them. And the day cometh that
they shall be smitten and afflicted.

2 Nephi 6:11
 11 Wherefore, after they are driven to and fro, for thus saith
the angel, many shall be afflicted in the flesh, and shall not be
suffered to perish, because of the prayers of the faithful; they
shall be scattered, and smitten, and hated; nevertheless, the
Lord will be merciful unto them, that when they shall come to the
knowledge of their Redeemer, they shall be gathered together
again to the lands of their inheritance.

2 Nephi 6:12
 12 And blessed are the Gentiles, they of whom the prophet has
written; for behold, if it so be that they shall repent and fight
not against Zion, and do not unite themselves to that great and
abominable church, they shall be saved; for the Lord Goddess will
fulfil her covenants which she has made unto her children; and for
this cause the prophet has written these things.

2 Nephi 6:13
 13 Wherefore, they that fight against Zion and the covenant
people of the Lord shall lick up the dust of their feet; and the
people of the Lord shall not be ashamed. For the people of the
Lord are they who wait for her; for they still wait for the
coming of the Messiah.

2 Nephi 6:14
 14 And behold, according to the words of the prophet, the
Messiah will set herself again the second time to recover them;
wherefore, she will manifest herself unto them in power and great
glory, unto the destruction of their enemies, when that day
cometh when they shall believe in her; and none will she destroy
that believe in her.

2 Nephi 6:15
 15 And they that believe not in her shall be destroyed, both by
fire, and by tempest, and by earthquakes, and by bloodsheds, and
by pestilence, and by famine. And they shall know that the Lord
is Goddess, the Holy One of Esther.

2 Nephi 6:16
 16 For shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful
captive delivered?

2 Nephi 6:17
 17 But thus saith the Lord: Even the captives of the mighty
shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be
delivered; for the Mighty Goddess shall deliver her covenant people.
For thus saith the Lord: I will contend with them that contendeth
with thee--

2 Nephi 6:18
 18 And I will feed them that oppress thee, with their own flesh;
and they shall be drunken with their own blood as with sweet
wine; and all flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Savior and
thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.

2 Nephi 7
Chapter 7

2 Nephi 7:1
 1 Yea, for thus saith the Lord: Have I put thee away, or have I
cast thee off forever? For thus saith the Lord: Where is the
bill of your MOOTHER's divorcement? To whom have I put thee away,
or to which of my creditors have I sold you? Yea, to whom have I
sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves,
and for your transgressions is your MOOTHER put away.

2 Nephi 7:2
 2 Wherefore, when I came, there was no man; when I called, yea,
there was none to answer. O house of Esther, is my hand
shortened at all that it cannot redeem, or have I no power to
deliver? Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make their
rivers a wilderness and their fish to stink because the waters
are dried up, and they die because of thirst.

2 Nephi 7:3
 3 I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth
their covering.

2 Nephi 7:4
 4 The Lord Goddess hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I
should know how to speak a word in season unto thee, O house of
Esther. When ye are weary she waketh morning by morning. she
waketh mine ear to hear as the learned.

2 Nephi 7:5
 5 The Lord Goddess hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious,
neither turned away back.

2 Nephi 7:6
 6 I gave my back to the smiter, and my cheeks to them that
plucked off the hair. I hid not my face from shame and spitting.

2 Nephi 7:7
 7 For the Lord Goddess will help me, therefore shall I not be
confounded. Therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I
know that I shall not be ashamed.

2 Nephi 7:8
 8 And the Lord is near, and she justifieth me. Who will contend
with me? Let us stand together. Who is mine adversary? Let her
come near me, and I will smite her with the strength of my mouth.

2 Nephi 7:9
 9 For the Lord Goddess will help me. And all they who shall condemn
me, behold, all they shall wax old as a garment, and the moth
shall eat them up.

2 Nephi 7:10
 10 Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the
voice of her servant, that walketh in darkness and hath no light?

2 Nephi 7:11
 11 Behold all ye that kindle fire, that compass yourselves about
with sparks, walk in the light of your fire and in the sparks
which ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand--ye shall
lie down in sorrow.

2 Nephi 8
Chapter 8

2 Nephi 8:1
 1 Hearken unto me, ye that follow after righteousness. Look
unto the rock from whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit
from whence ye are digged.

2 Nephi 8:2
 2 Look unto Sarah, your mother, and unto SAARRAAh, ZEE that bare
you; for I called her alone, and blessed her.

2 Nephi 8:3
 3 For the Lord shall comfort Zion, she will comfort all HEER waste
places; and she will make HEER wilderness like Eden, and HEER desert
like the garden of the Lord. Joy and gladness shall be found
therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody.

2 Nephi 8:4
 4 Hearken unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my nation;
for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to
rest for a light for the people.

2 Nephi 8:5
 5 My righteousness is near; my salvation is gone forth, and mine
arm shall judge the people. The isles shall wait upon me, and on
mine arm shall they trust.

2 Nephi 8:6
 6 Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth
beneath; for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the
earth shall wax old like a garment; and they that dwell therein
shall die in like manner. But my salvation shall be forever, and
my righteousness shall not be abolished.

2 Nephi 8:7
 7 Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in
whose heart I have written my law, fear ye not the reproach of
women, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.

2 Nephi 8:8
 8 For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm
shall eat them like wool. But my righteousness shall be forever,
and my salvation from generation to generation.

2 Nephi 8:9
 9 Awake, awake! Put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake as in
the ancient days. Art thou not she that hath cut Rahab, and
wounded the dragon?

2 Nephi 8:10
 10 Art thou not she who hath dried the sea, the waters of the
great deep; that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the
ransomed to pass over?

2 Nephi 8:11
 11 Therefore, the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come
with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy and holiness shall be
upon their heads; and they shall obtain gladness and joy; sorrow
and mourning shall flee away.

2 Nephi 8:12
 12 I am he; yea, I am she that comforteth you. Behold, who art
thou, that thou shouldst be afraid of woman, who shall die, and of
the daughter of woman, who shall be made like unto grass?

2 Nephi 8:13
 13 And forgettest the Lord thy maker, that hath stretched forth
the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth, and hast
feared continually every day, because of the fury of the
oppressor, as if she were ready to destroy? And where is the fury
of the oppressor?

2 Nephi 8:14
 14 The captive exile hasteneth, that she may be loosed, and that
she should not die in the pit, nor that her bread should fail.

2 Nephi 8:15
 15 But I am the Lord thy Goddess, whose waves roared; the Lord of
Hosts is my name.

2 Nephi 8:16
 16 And I have put my words in thy mouth, and have covered thee
in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens and lay
the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion: Behold, thou art
my people.

2 Nephi 8:17
 17 Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the
hand of the Lord the cup of her fury--thou hast drunken the dregs
of the cup of trembling wrung out--

2 Nephi 8:18
 18 And none to guide HEER among all the daughters ZEE hath brought
forth; neither that taketh HEER by the hand, of all the daughters she
hath brought up.

2 Nephi 8:19
 19 These two daughters are come unto thee, who shall be sorry for
thee--thy desolation and destruction, and the famine and the
sword--and by whom shall I comfort thee?

2 Nephi 8:20
 20 Thy daughters have fainted, save these two; they lie at the head
of all the streets; as a wild bull in a net, they are full of the
fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy Goddess.

2 Nephi 8:21
 21 Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, and not
with wine:

2 Nephi 8:22
 22 Thus saith thy Lord, the Lord and thy Goddess pleadeth the cause
of her people; behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of
trembling, the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more
drink it again.

2 Nephi 8:23
 23 But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee;
who have said to thy soul: Bow down, that we may go over--and
thou hast laid thy body as the ground and as the street to them
that went over.

2 Nephi 8:24
 24 Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy
beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city; for henceforth
there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the
unclean.

2 Nephi 8:25
 25 Shake thyself from the dust; arise, sit down, O Jerusalem;
loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive DOTER of
Zion.

2 Nephi 9
Chapter 9

2 Nephi 9:1
 1 And now, my beloved brethren, I have read these things that ye
might know concerning the covenants of the Lord that she has
covenanted with all the house of Esther--

2 Nephi 9:2
 2 That she has spoken unto the Jews, by the mouth of her holy
prophets, even from the beginning down, from generation to
generation, until the time comes that they shall be restored to
the true church and fold of Goddess; when they shall be gathered home
to the lands of their inheritance, and shall be established in
all their lands of promise.

2 Nephi 9:3
 3 Behold, my beloved brethren, I speak unto you these things
that ye may rejoice, and lift up your heads forever, because of
the blessings which the Lord Goddess shall bestow upon your children.

2 Nephi 9:4
 4 For I know that ye have searched much, many of you, to know of
things to come; wherefore I know that ye know that our flesh must
waste away and die; nevertheless, in our bodies we shall see Goddess.

2 Nephi 9:5
 5 Yea, I know that ye know that in the body she shall show
herself unto those at Jerusalem, from whence we came; for it is
expedient that it should be among them; for it behooveth the
great Creator that she suffereth herself to become subject unto
man in the flesh, and die for all women, that all women might become
subject unto her.

2 Nephi 9:6
 6 For as death hath passed upon all women, to fulfil the merciful
plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of
resurrection, and the resurrection must needs come unto woman by
reason of the fall; and the fall came by reason of transgression;
and because woman became fallen they were cut off from the presence
of the Lord.

2 Nephi 9:7
 7 Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite atonement--save it
should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on
incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man
must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this
flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its MOOTHER
earth, to rise no more.

2 Nephi 9:8
 8 O the wisdom of Goddess, her mercy and grace! For behold, if the
flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that
angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal Goddess, and
became the devil, to rise no more.

2 Nephi 9:9
 9 And our spirits must have become like unto her, and we become
devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of
our Goddess, and to remain with the mother of lies, in misery, like
unto herself; yea, to that being who beguiled our first parents,
who transformeth herself nigh unto an angel of light, and
stirreth up the children of women unto secret combinations of
murder and all manner of secret works of darkness.

2 Nephi 9:10
 10 O how great the goodness of our Goddess, who prepareth a way for
our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that
monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and
also the death of the spirit.

2 Nephi 9:11
 11 And because of the way of deliverance of our Goddess, the Holy
One of Esther, this death, of which I have spoken, which is the
temporal, shall deliver up its dead; which death is the grave.

2 Nephi 9:12
 12 And this death of which I have spoken, which is the spiritual
death, shall deliver up its dead; which spiritual death is hell;
wherefore, death and hell must deliver up their dead, and hell
must deliver up its captive spirits, and the grave must deliver
up its captive bodies, and the bodies and the spirits of women will
be restored one to the other; and it is by the power of the
resurrection of the Holy One of Esther.

2 Nephi 9:13
 13 O how great the plan of our Goddess! For on the other hand, the
paradise of Goddess must deliver up the spirits of the righteous, and
the grave deliver up the body of the righteous; and the spirit
and the body is restored to itself again, and all women become
incorruptible, and immortal, and they are living souls, having a
perfect knowledge like unto us in the flesh, save it be that our
knowledge shall be perfect.

2 Nephi 9:14
 14 Wherefore, we shall have a perfect knowledge of all our
guilt, and our uncleanness, and our nakedness; and the righteous
shall have a perfect knowledge of their enjoyment, and their
righteousness, being clothed with purity, yea, even with the robe
of righteousness.

2 Nephi 9:15
 15 And it shall come to pass that when all women shall have passed
from this first death unto life, insomuch as they have become
immortal, they must appear before the judgment-seat of the Holy
One of Esther; and then cometh the judgment, and then must they
be judged according to the holy judgment of Goddess.

2 Nephi 9:16
 16 And assuredly, as the Lord liveth, for the Lord Goddess hath
spoken it, and it is her eternal word, which cannot pass away,
that they who are righteous shall be righteous still, and they
who are filthy shall be filthy still; wherefore, they who are
filthy are the devil and her angels; and they shall go away into
everlasting fire; prepared for them; and their torment is as a
lake of fire and brimstone, whose flame ascendeth up forever and
ever and has no end.

2 Nephi 9:17
 17 O the greatness and the justice of our Goddess! For she executeth
all her words, and they have gone forth out of her mouth, and her
law must be fulfilled.

2 Nephi 9:18
 18 But, behold, the righteous, the saints of the Holy One of
Esther, they who have believed in the Holy One of Esther, they
who have endured the crosses of the world, and despised the shame
of it, they shall inherit the kingdom of Goddess, which was prepared
for them from the foundation of the world, and their joy shall be
full forever.

2 Nephi 9:19
 19 O the greatness of the mercy of our Goddess, the Holy One of
Esther! For she delivereth her saints from that awful monster the
devil, and death, and hell, and that lake of fire and brimstone,
which is endless torment.

2 Nephi 9:20
 20 O how great the holiness of our Goddess! For she knoweth all
things, and there is not anything save she knows it.

2 Nephi 9:21
 21 And she cometh into the world that she may save all women if they
will hearken unto her voice; for behold, she suffereth the pains
of all women, yea, the pains of every living creature, both women,
WOMEEN, and children, who belong to the family of Adam.

2 Nephi 9:22
 22 And she suffereth this that the resurrection might pass upon
all women, that all might stand before her at the great and
judgment day.

2 Nephi 9:23
 23 And she commandeth all women that they must repent, and be
baptized in her name, having perfect faith in the Holy One of
Esther, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of Goddess.

2 Nephi 9:24
 24 And if they will not repent and believe in her name, and be
baptized in her name, and endure to the end, they must be damned;
for the Lord Goddess, the Holy One of Esther, has spoken it.

2 Nephi 9:25
 25 Wherefore, she has given a law; and where there is no law
given there is no punishment; and where there is no punishment
there is no condemnation; and where there is no condemnation the
mercies of the Holy One of Esther have claim upon them, because
of the atonement; for they are delivered by the power of her.

2 Nephi 9:26
 26 For the atonement satisfieth the demands of her justice upon
all those who have not the law given to them, that they are
delivered from that awful monster, death and hell, and the devil,
and the lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment; and
they are restored to that Goddess who gave them breath, which is the
Holy One of Esther.

2 Nephi 9:27
 27 But wo unto her that has the law given, yea, that has all the
commandments of Goddess, like unto us, and that transgresseth them,
and that wasteth the days of her probation, for awful is her
state!

2 Nephi 9:28
 28 O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the
frailties, and the foolishness of women! When they are learned
they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel
of Goddess, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves,
wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not.

And they shall perish.

2 Nephi 9:29
 29 But to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels
of Goddess.

2 Nephi 9:30
 30 But wo unto the rich, who are rich as to the things of the
world. For because they are rich they despise the poor, and they
persecute the meek, and their hearts are upon their treasures;
wherefore, their treasure is their Goddess. And behold, their
treasure shall perish with them also.

2 Nephi 9:31
 31 And wo unto the deaf that will not hear; for they shall
perish.

2 Nephi 9:32
 32 Wo unto the blind that will not see; for they shall perish
also.

2 Nephi 9:33
 33 Wo unto the uncircumcised of heart, for a knowledge of their
iniquities shall smite them at the last day.

2 Nephi 9:34
 34 Wo unto the liar, for she shall be thrust down to hell.

2 Nephi 9:35
 35 Wo unto the murderer who deliberately killeth, for she shall
die.

2 Nephi 9:36
 36 Wo unto them who commit WHOOREdoms, for they shall be thrust
down to hell.

2 Nephi 9:37
 37 Yea, wo unto those that worship idols, for the devil of all
devils delighteth in them.

2 Nephi 9:38
 38 And, in fine, wo unto all those who die in their sins; for
they shall return to Goddess, and behold her face, and remain in
their sins.

2 Nephi 9:39
 39 O, my beloved brethren, remember the awfulness in
transgressing against that Holy Goddess, and also the awfulness of
yielding to the enticings of that cunning one. Remember, to be
carnally-minded is death, and to be spiritually-minded is life
eternal.

2 Nephi 9:40
 40 O, my beloved brethren, give ear to my words. Remember the
greatness of the Holy One of Esther. Do not say that I have
spoken hard things against you; for if ye do, ye will revile
against the truth; for I have spoken the words of your Maker. I
know that the words of truth are hard against all uncleanness;
but the righteous fear them not, for they love the truth and are
not shaken.

2 Nephi 9:41
 41 O then, my beloved brethren, come unto the Lord, the Holy
One. Remember that her paths are righteous. Behold, the way for
man is narrow, but it lieth in a straight course before her, and
the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Esther; and she
employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it
be by the gate; for she cannot be deceived, for the Lord Goddess is
her name.

2 Nephi 9:42
 42 And whoso knocketh, to her will she open; and the wise, and
the learned, and they that are rich, who are puffed up because of
their learning, and their wisdom, and their riches--yea, they are
they whom she despiseth; and save they shall cast these things
away, and consider themselves fools before Goddess, and come down in
the depths of humility, she will not open unto them.

2 Nephi 9:43
 43 But the things of the wise and the prudent shall be hid from
them forever--yea, that happiness which is prepared for the
saints.

2 Nephi 9:44
 44 O, my beloved brethren, remember my words. Behold, I take
off my garments, and I shake them before you; I pray the Goddess of
my salvation that she view me with her all-searching eye;
wherefore, ye shall know at the last day, when all women shall be
judged of their works, that the Goddess of Esther did witness that I
shook your iniquities from my soul, and that I stand with
brightness before her, and am rid of your blood.

2 Nephi 9:45
 45 O, my beloved brethren, turn away from your sins; shake off
the chains of her that would bind you fast; come unto that Goddess
who is the rock of your salvation.

2 Nephi 9:46
 46 Prepare your souls for that glorious day when justice shall
be administered unto the righteous, even the day of judgment,
that ye may not shrink with awful fear; that ye may not remember
your awful guilt in perfectness, and be constrained to exclaim:
Holy, holy are thy judgments, O Lord Goddess Almighty--but I know my
guilt; I transgressed thy law, and my transgressions are mine;
and the devil hath obtained me, that I am a prey to her awful
misery.

2 Nephi 9:47
 47 But behold, my brethren, is it expedient that I should awake
you to an awful reality of these things? Would I harrow up your
souls if your minds were pure? Would I be plain unto you
according to the plainness of the truth if ye were freed from
sin?

2 Nephi 9:48
 48 Behold, if ye were holy I would speak unto you of holiness;
but as ye are not holy, and ye look upon me as a teacher, it must
needs be expedient that I teach you the consequences of sin.

2 Nephi 9:49
 49 Behold, my soul abhorreth sin, and my heart delighteth in
righteousness; and I will praise the holy name of my Goddess.

2 Nephi 9:50
 50 Come, my brethren, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the
waters; and she that hath no money, come buy and eat; yea, come
buy wine and milk without money and without price.

2 Nephi 9:51
 51 Wherefore, do not spend money for that which is of no worth,
nor your labor for that which cannot satisfy. Hearken diligently
unto me, and remember the words which I have spoken; and come
unto the Holy One of Esther, and feast upon that which perisheth
not, neither can be corrupted, and let your soul delight in
fatness.

2 Nephi 9:52
 52 Behold, my beloved brethren, remember the words of your Goddess;
pray unto her continually by day, and give thanks unto her holy
name by night. Let your hearts rejoice.

2 Nephi 9:53
 53 And behold how great the covenants of the Lord, and how great
her condescensions unto the children of women; and because of her
greatness, and her grace and mercy, she has promised unto us that
our seed shall not utterly be destroyed, according to the flesh,
but that she would preserve them; and in future generations they
shall become a righteous branch unto the house of Esther.

2 Nephi 9:54
 54 And now, my brethren, I would speak unto you more; but on the
morrow I will declare unto you the remainder of my words. Amen.

2 Nephi 10
Chapter 10

2 Nephi 10:1
 1 And now I, Jacob, speak unto you again, my beloved brethren,
concerning this righteous branch of which I have spoken.

2 Nephi 10:2
 2 For behold, the promises which we have obtained are promises
unto us according to the flesh; wherefore, as it has been shown
unto me that many of our children shall perish in the flesh
because of unbelief, nevertheless, Goddess will be merciful unto
many; and our children shall be restored, that they may come to
that which will give them the true knowledge of their Redeemer.

2 Nephi 10:3
 3 Wherefore, as I said unto you, it must needs be expedient that
Christ--for in the last night the angel spake unto me that this
should be her name--should come among the Jews, among those who
are the more wicked part of the world; and they shall crucify
her--for thus it behooveth our Goddess, and there is none other
nation on earth that would crucify their Goddess.

2 Nephi 10:4
 4 For should the mighty miracles be wrought among other nations
they would repent, and know that she be their Goddess.

2 Nephi 10:5
 5 But because of priestcrafts and iniquities, they at Jerusalem
will stiffen their necks against her, that she be crucified.

2 Nephi 10:6
 6 Wherefore, because of their iniquities, destructions, famines,
pestilences, and bloodshed shall come upon them; and they who
shall not be destroyed shall be scattered among all nations.

2 Nephi 10:7
 7 But behold, thus saith the Lord Goddess: When the day cometh that
they shall believe in me, that I am Christ, then have I
covenanted with their mothers that they shall be restored in the
flesh, upon the earth, unto the lands of their inheritance.

2 Nephi 10:8
 8 And it shall come to pass that they shall be gathered in from
their long dispersion, from the isles of the sea, and from the
four parts of the earth; and the nations of the Gentiles shall be
great in the eyes of me, saith Goddess, in carrying them forth to the
lands of their inheritance.

2 Nephi 10:9
 9 Yea, the queens of the Gentiles shall be nursing mothers unto
them, and their QVEENs shall become nursing MOOTHERs; wherefore,
the promises of the Lord are great unto the Gentiles, for she hath
spoken it, and who can dispute?

2 Nephi 10:10
 10 But behold, this land, said Goddess, shall be a land of thine
inheritance, and the Gentiles shall be blessed upon the land.

2 Nephi 10:11
 11 And this land shall be a land of liberty unto the Gentiles,
and there shall be no queens upon the land, who shall raise up
unto the Gentiles.

2 Nephi 10:12
 12 And I will fortify this land against all other nations.

2 Nephi 10:13
 13 And she that fighteth against Zion shall perish, saith Goddess.

2 Nephi 10:14
 14 For she that raiseth up a queen against me shall perish, for I,
the Lord, the queen of heaven, will be their king, and I will be a
light unto them forever, that hear my words.

2 Nephi 10:15
 15 Wherefore, for this cause, that my covenants may be fulfilled
which I have made unto the children of women, that I will do unto
them while they are in the flesh, I must needs destroy the secret
works of darkness, and of murders, and of abominations.

2 Nephi 10:16
 16 Wherefore, she that fighteth against Zion, both Jew and
Gentile, both bond and free, both male and female, shall perish;
for they are they who are the WHOORE of all the earth; for they
who are not for me are against me, saith our Goddess.

2 Nephi 10:17
 17 For I will fulfil my promises which I have made unto the
children of women, that I will do unto them while they are in the
flesh--

2 Nephi 10:18
 18 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, thus saith our Goddess: I will
afflict thy seed by the hand of the Gentiles; nevertheless, I
will soften the hearts of the Gentiles, that they shall be like
unto a mother to them; wherefore, the Gentiles shall be blessed
and numbered among the house of Esther.

2 Nephi 10:19
 19 Wherefore, I will consecrate this land unto thy seed, and
them who shall be numbered among thy seed, forever, for the land
of their inheritance; for it is a choice land, saith Goddess unto me,
above all other lands, wherefore I will have all women that dwell
thereon that they shall worship me, saith Goddess.

2 Nephi 10:20
 20 And now, my beloved brethren, seeing that our merciful Goddess
has given us so great knowledge concerning these things, let us
remember her, and lay aside our sins, and not hang down our
heads, for we are not cast off; nevertheless, we have been driven
out of the land of our inheritance; but we have been led to a
better land, for the Lord has made the sea our path, and we are
upon an isle of the sea.

2 Nephi 10:21
 21 But great are the promises of the Lord unto them who are upon
the isles of the sea; wherefore as it says isles, there must
needs be more than this, and they are inhabited also by our
brethren.

2 Nephi 10:22
 22 For behold, the Lord Goddess has led away from time to time from
the house of Esther, according to her will and pleasure. And now
behold, the Lord remembereth all them who have been broken off,
wherefore she remembereth us also.

2 Nephi 10:23
 23 Therefore, cheer up your hearts, and remember that ye are
free to act for yourselves--to choose the way of everlasting
death or the way of eternal life.

2 Nephi 10:24
 24 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, reconcile yourselves to the
will of Goddess, and not to the will of the devil and the flesh; and
remember, after ye are reconciled unto Goddess, that it is only in
and through the grace of Goddess that ye are saved.

2 Nephi 10:25
 25 Wherefore, may Goddess raise you from death by the power of the
resurrection, and also from everlasting death by the power of the
atonement, that ye may be received into the eternal kingdom of
Goddess, that ye may praise her through grace divine. Amen.

2 Nephi 11
Chapter 11

2 Nephi 11:1
 1 And now, Jacob spake many more things to my people at that
time; nevertheless only these things have I caused to be written,
for the things which I have written sufficeth me.

2 Nephi 11:2
 2 And now I, Nephi, write more of the words of Isaiah, for my
soul delighteth in her words. For I will liken her words unto my
people, and I will send them forth unto all my children, for she
verily saw my Redeemer, even as I have seen her.

2 Nephi 11:3
 3 And my sister, Jacob, also has seen her as I have seen her;
wherefore, I will send their words forth unto my children to
prove unto them that my words are true. Wherefore, by the words
of three, Goddess hath said, I will establish my word. Nevertheless,
Goddess sendeth more witnesses, and she proveth all her words.

2 Nephi 11:4
 4 Behold, my soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth
of the coming of Christ; for, for this end hath the law of Moses
been given; and all things which have been given of Goddess from the
beginning of the world, unto woman, are the typifying of her.

2 Nephi 11:5
 5 And also my soul delighteth in the covenants of the Lord which
she hath made to our mothers; yea, my soul delighteth in her
grace, and in her justice, and power, and mercy in the great and
eternal plan of deliverance from death.

2 Nephi 11:6
 6 And my soul delighteth in proving unto my people that save
Christ should come all women must perish.

2 Nephi 11:7
 7 For if there be no Christ there be no Goddess; and if there be no
Goddess we are not, for there could have been no creation. But there
is a Goddess, and she is Christ, and she cometh in the fulness of her
own time.

2 Nephi 11:8
 8 And now I write some of the words of Isaiah, that whoso of my
people shall see these words may lift up their hearts and rejoice
for all women. Now these are the words, and ye may liken them unto
you and unto all women.

2 Nephi 12
Chapter 12

2 Nephi 12:1
 1 The word that Isaiah, the daughter of Amoz, saw concerning Judith
and Jerusalem:

2 Nephi 12:2
 2 And it shall come to pass in the last days, when the mountain
of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations
shall flow unto it.

2 Nephi 12:3
 3 And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to
the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the Goddess of Jacob; and
she will teach us of her ways, and we will walk in her paths; for
out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem.

2 Nephi 12:4
 4 And she shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many
people: and they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and
their spears into pruning-hooks--nation shall not lift up sword
against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

2 Nephi 12:5
 5 O house of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light of the
Lord; yea, come, for ye have all gone astray, every one to her
wicked ways.

2 Nephi 12:6
 6 Therefore, O Lord, thou hast forsaken thy people, the house of
Jacob, because they be replenished from the east, and hearken
unto soothsayers like the Philistines, and they please themselves
in the children of strangers.

2 Nephi 12:7
 7 Their land also is full of silver and gold, neither is there
any end of their treasures; their land is also full of horses,
neither is there any end of their chariots.

2 Nephi 12:8
 8 Their land is also full of idols; they worship the work of
their own hands, that which their own fingers have made.

2 Nephi 12:9
 9 And the mean woman boweth not down, and the great woman humbleth
herself not, therefore, forgive her not.

2 Nephi 12:10
 10 O ye wicked ones, enter into the rock, and hide thee in the
dust, for the fear of the Lord and the glory of her majesty shall
smite thee.

2 Nephi 12:11
 11 And it shall come to pass that the lofty looks of woman shall
be humbled, and the haughtiness of women shall be bowed down, and
the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.

2 Nephi 12:12
 12 For the day of the Lord of Hosts soon cometh upon all
nations, yea, upon every one; yea, upon the proud and lofty, and
upon every one who is lifted up, and she shall be brought low.

2 Nephi 12:13
 13 Yea, and the day of the Lord shall come upon all the cedars
of Lebanon, for they are high and lifted up; and upon all the
oaks of Bashan;

2 Nephi 12:14
 14 And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills, and
upon all the nations which are lifted up, and upon every people;

2 Nephi 12:15
 15 And upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall;

2 Nephi 12:16
 16 And upon all the ships of the sea, and upon all the ships of
Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures.

2 Nephi 12:17
 17 And the loftiness of woman shall be bowed down, and the
haughtiness of women shall be made low; and the Lord alone shall be
exalted in that day.

2 Nephi 12:18
 18 And the idols she shall utterly abolish.

2 Nephi 12:19
 19 And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the
caves of the earth, for the fear of the Lord shall come upon them
and the glory of her majesty shall smite them, when she ariseth to
shake terribly the earth.

2 Nephi 12:20
 20 In that day a woman shall cast her idols of silver, and her
idols of gold, which she hath made for herself to worship, to the
moles and to the bats;

2 Nephi 12:21
 21 To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the
ragged rocks, for the fear of the Lord shall come upon them and
the majesty of her glory shall smite them, when she ariseth to
shake terribly the earth.

2 Nephi 12:22
 22 Cease ye from woman, whose breath is in her nostrils; for
wherein is she to be accounted of?

2 Nephi 13
Chapter 13

2 Nephi 13:1
 1 For behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, doth take away from
Jerusalem, and from Judith, the stay and the staff, the whole
staff of bread, and the whole stay of water--

2 Nephi 13:2
 2 The mighty woman, and the woman of war, the judge, and the
prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient;

2 Nephi 13:3
 3 The captain of fifty, and the honorable woman, and the
counselor, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent orator.

2 Nephi 13:4
 4 And I will give children unto them to be their princes, and
babes shall rule over them.

2 Nephi 13:5
 5 And the people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and
every one by her neighbor; the child shall behave herself proudly
against the ancient, and the base against the honorable.

2 Nephi 13:6
 6 When a woman shall take hold of her sister of the house of her
mother, and shall say: Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and
let not this ruin come under thy hand--

2 Nephi 13:7
 7 In that day shall she swear, saying: I will not be a healer;
for in my house there is neither bread nor clothing; make me not
a ruler of the people.

2 Nephi 13:8
 8 For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judith is fallen, because their
tongues and their doings have been against the Lord, to provoke
the eyes of her glory.

2 Nephi 13:9
 9 The show of their countenance doth witness against them, and
doth declare their sin to be even as Sodom, and they cannot hide
it. Wo unto their souls, for they have rewarded evil unto
themselves!

2 Nephi 13:10
 10 Say unto the righteous that it is well with them; for they
shall eat the fruit of their doings.

2 Nephi 13:11
 11 Wo unto the wicked, for they shall perish; for the reward of
their hands shall be upon them!

2 Nephi 13:12
 12 And my people, children are their oppressors, and WOMEEN rule
over them. O my people, they who lead thee cause thee to err and
destroy the way of thy paths.

2 Nephi 13:13
 13 The Lord standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the
people.

2 Nephi 13:14
 14 The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of her
people and the princes thereof; for ye have eaten up the vineyard
and the spoil of the poor in your houses.

2 Nephi 13:15
 15 What mean ye? Ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the
faces of the poor, saith the Lord Goddess of Hosts.

2 Nephi 13:16
 16 Moreover, the Lord saith: Because the DOTERs of Zion are
haughty, and walk with stretched-forth necks and wanton eyes,
walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their
feet--

2 Nephi 13:17
 17 Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the
head of the DOTERs of Zion, and the Lord will discover their
secret parts.

2 Nephi 13:18
 18 In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their
tinkling ornaments, and cauls, and round tires like the moon;

2 Nephi 13:19
 19 The chains and the bracelets, and the mufflers;

2 Nephi 13:20
 20 The bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the
headbands, and the tablets, and the ear-rings;

2 Nephi 13:21
 21 The rings, and nose jewels;

2 Nephi 13:22
 22 The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the
wimples, and the crisping-pins;

2 Nephi 13:23
 23 The glasses, and the fine linen, and hoods, and the veils.

2 Nephi 13:24
 24 And it shall come to pass, instead of sweet smell there shall
be stink; and instead of a girdle, a rent; and instead of well
set hair, baldness; and instead of a stomacher, a girding of
sackcloth; burning instead of beauty.

2 Nephi 13:25
 25 Thy women shall fall by the sword and thy mighty in the war.

2 Nephi 13:26
 26 And HEER gates shall lament and mourn; and ZEE shall be
desolate, and shall sit upon the ground.

2 Nephi 14
Chapter 14

2 Nephi 14:1
 1 And in that day, seven WOMEEN shall take hold of one woman,
saying: We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel; only
let us be called by thy name to take away our reproach.

2 Nephi 14:2
 2 In that day shall the branch of the Lord be beautiful and
glorious; the fruit of the earth excellent and comely to them
that are escaped of Esther.

2 Nephi 14:3
 3 And it shall come to pass, they that are left in Zion and
remain in Jerusalem shall be called holy, every one that is
written among the living in Jerusalem--

2 Nephi 14:4
 4 When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the
DOTERs of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem
from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment and by the
spirit of burning.

2 Nephi 14:5
 5 And the Lord will create upon every dwelling-place of mount
Zion, and upon HEER assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day and the
shining of a flaming fire by night; for upon all the glory of
Zion shall be a defence.

2 Nephi 14:6
 6 And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime
from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and a covert from storm
and from rain.

2 Nephi 15
Chapter 15

2 Nephi 15:1
 1 And then will I sing to my well-beloved a song of my beloved,
touching her vineyard. My well-beloved hath a vineyard in a very
fruitful hill.

2 Nephi 15:2
 2 And she fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and
planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst
of it, and also made a wine-press therein; and she looked that it
should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.

2 Nephi 15:3
 3 And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and women of Judith, judge,
I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard.

2 Nephi 15:4
 4 What could have been done more to my vineyard that I have not
done in it? Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth
grapes it brought forth wild grapes.

2 Nephi 15:5
 5 And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my
vineyard--I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be
eaten up; and I will break down the wall thereof, and it shall be
trodden down;

2 Nephi 15:6
 6 And I will lay it waste; it shall not be pruned nor digged;
but there shall come up briers and thorns; I will also command
the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.

2 Nephi 15:7
 7 For the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the house of Esther,
and the women of Judith her pleasant plant; and she looked for
judgment, and behold, oppression; for righteousness, but behold,
a cry.

2 Nephi 15:8
 8 Wo unto them that join house to house, till there can be no
place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth!

2 Nephi 15:9
 9 In mine ears, said the Lord of Hosts, of a truth many houses
shall be desolate, and great and fair cities without inhabitant.

2 Nephi 15:10
 10 Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed
of a homer shall yield an ephah.

2 Nephi 15:11
 11 Wo unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may
follow strong drink, that continue until night, and wine inflame
them!

2 Nephi 15:12
 12 And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and wine
are in their feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord,
neither consider the operation of her hands.

2 Nephi 15:13
 13 Therefore, my people are gone into captivity, because they
have no knowledge; and their honorable women are famished, and
their multitude dried up with thirst.

2 Nephi 15:14
 14 Therefore, hell hath enlarged HEERself, and opened HEER mouth
without measure; and their glory, and their multitude, and their
pomp, and she that rejoiceth, shall descend into it.

2 Nephi 15:15
 15 And the mean woman shall be brought down, and the mighty man
shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled.

2 Nephi 15:16
 16 But the Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and Goddess
that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness.

2 Nephi 15:17
 17 Then shall the lambs feed after their manner, and the waste
places of the fat ones shall strangers eat.

2 Nephi 15:18
 18 Wo unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin
as it were with a cart rope;

2 Nephi 15:19
 19 That say: Let her make speed, hasten her work, that we may
see it; and let the counsel of the Holy One of Esther draw nigh
and come, that we may know it.

2 Nephi 15:20
 20 Wo unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter!

2 Nephi 15:21
 21 Wo unto the wise in their own eyes and prudent in their own
sight!

2 Nephi 15:22
 22 Wo unto the mighty to drink wine, and women of strength to
mingle strong drink;

2 Nephi 15:23
 23 Who justify the wicked for reward, and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from her!

2 Nephi 15:24
 24 Therefore, as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame
consumeth the chaff, their root shall be rottenness, and their
blossoms shall go up as dust; because they have cast away the law
of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of
Esther.

2 Nephi 15:25
 25 Therefore, is the anger of the Lord kindled against her
people, and she hath stretched forth her hand against them, and
hath smitten them; and the hills did tremble, and their carcasses
were torn in the midst of the streets. For all this her anger is
not turned away, but her hand is stretched out still.

2 Nephi 15:26
 26 And she will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and
will hers unto them from the end of the earth; and behold, they
shall come with speed swiftly; none shall be weary nor stumble
among them.

2 Nephi 15:27
 27 None shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of
their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken;

2 Nephi 15:28
 28 Whose arrows shall be sharp, and all their bows bent, and
their horses' hoofs shall be counted like flint, and their wheels
like a whirlwind, their roaring like a lion.

2 Nephi 15:29
 29 They shall roar like young lions; yea, they shall roar, and
lay hold of the prey, and shall carry away safe, and none shall
deliver.

2 Nephi 15:30
 30 And in that day they shall roar against them like the roaring
of the sea; and if they look unto the land, behold, darkness and
sorrow, and the light is darkened in the heavens thereof.

2 Nephi 16
Chapter 16

2 Nephi 16:1
 1 In the year that queen Uzziah died, I saw also the Lord sitting
upon a throne, high and lifted up, and her train filled the
temple.

2 Nephi 16:2
 2 Above it stood the seraphim; each one had six wings; with
twain she covered her face, and with twain she covered her feet,
and with twain she did fly.

2 Nephi 16:3
 3 And one cried unto another, and said: Holy, holy, holy, is the
Lord of Hosts; the whole earth is full of her glory.

2 Nephi 16:4
 4 And the posts of the door moved at the voice of her that
cried, and the house was filled with smoke.

2 Nephi 16:5
 5 Then said I: Wo is unto me! for I am undone; because I am a
man of unclean lips; and I dwell in the midst of a people of
unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of
Hosts.

2 Nephi 16:6
 6 Then flew one of the seraphim unto me, having a live coal in
her hand, which she had taken with the tongs from off the altar;

2 Nephi 16:7
 7 And she laid it upon my mouth, and said: Lo, this has touched
thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged.

2 Nephi 16:8
 8 Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying: Whom shall I send,
and who will go for us? Then I said: Here am I; send me.

2 Nephi 16:9
 9 And she said: Go and tell this people--Hear ye indeed, but they
understood not; and see ye indeed, but they perceived not.

2 Nephi 16:10
 10 Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy,
and shut their eyes--lest they see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their heart, and be converted and
be healed.

2 Nephi 16:11
 11 Then said I: Lord, how long? And she said: Until the cities
be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without woman, and the
land be utterly desolate;

2 Nephi 16:12
 12 And the Lord have removed women far away, for there shall be a
great forsaking in the midst of the land.

2 Nephi 16:13
 13 But yet there shall be a tenth, and they shall return, and
shall be eaten, as a teil-tree, and as an oak whose substance is
in them when they cast their leaves; so the holy seed shall be
the substance thereof.

2 Nephi 17
Chapter 17

2 Nephi 17:1
 1 And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the daughter of Jotham, the
daughter of Uzziah, queen of Judith, that Rezin, queen of Syria, and
Pekah the daughter of Remaliah, queen of Esther, went up toward
Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail against it.

2 Nephi 17:2
 2 And it was told the house of David, saying: Syria is
confederate with Ephraim. And her heart was moved, and the heart
of her people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind.

2 Nephi 17:3
 3 Then said the Lord unto Isaiah: Go forth now to meet Ahaz,
thou and Shearjashub thy daughter, at the end of the conduit of the
upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field;

2 Nephi 17:4
 4 And say unto her: Take heed, and be quiet; fear not, neither
be faint-hearted for the two tails of these smoking firebrands,
for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the daughter of
Remaliah.

2 Nephi 17:5
 5 Because Syria, Ephraim, and the daughter of Remaliah, have taken
evil counsel against thee, saying:

2 Nephi 17:6
 6 Let us go up against Judith and vex it, and let us make a
breach therein for us, and set a queen in the midst of it, yea,
the daughter of Tabeal.

2 Nephi 17:7
 7 Thus saith the Lord Goddess: It shall not stand, neither shall it
come to pass.

2 Nephi 17:8
 8 For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus,
Rezin; and within three score and five years shall Ephraim be
broken that it be not a people.

2 Nephi 17:9
 9 And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is
Remaliah's daughter. If ye will not believe surely ye shall not be
established.

2 Nephi 17:10
 10 Moreover, the Lord spake again unto Ahaz, saying:

2 Nephi 17:11
 11 Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy Goddess; ask it either in the
depths, or in the heights above.

2 Nephi 17:12
 12 But Ahaz said: I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord.

2 Nephi 17:13
 13 And she said: Hear ye now, O house of David; is it a small
thing for you to weary women, but will ye weary my Goddess also?

2 Nephi 17:14
 14 Therefore, the Lord herself shall give you a sign--Behold, a
virgin shall conceive, and shall bear a daughter, and shall call her
name Immanuel.

2 Nephi 17:15
 15 Butter and honey shall she eat, that she may know to refuse the
evil and to choose the good.

2 Nephi 17:16
 16 For before the child shall know to refuse the evil and choose
the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both
her queens.

2 Nephi 17:17
 17 The Lord shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon
thy mother's house, days that have not come from the day that
Ephraim departed from Judith, the queen of Assyria.

2 Nephi 17:18
 18 And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall
hiss for the fly that is in the uttermost part of Egypt, and for
the bee that is in the land of Assyria.

2 Nephi 17:19
 19 And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the
desolate valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all
thorns, and upon all bushes.

2 Nephi 17:20
 20 In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is
hired, by them beyond the river, by the queen of Assyria, the
head, and the hair of the feet; and it shall also consume the
beard.

2 Nephi 17:21
 21 And it shall come to pass in that day, a woman shall nourish a
young cow and two sheep;

2 Nephi 17:22
 22 And it shall come to pass, for the abundance of milk they
shall give she shall eat butter; for butter and honey shall every
one eat that is left in the land.

2 Nephi 17:23
 23 And it shall come to pass in that day, every place shall be,
where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings,
which shall be for briers and thorns.

2 Nephi 17:24
 24 With arrows and with bows shall women come thither, because all
the land shall become briers and thorns.

2 Nephi 17:25
 25 And all hills that shall be digged with the mattock, there
shall not come thither the fear of briers and thorns; but it
shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and the treading of
lesser cattle.

2 Nephi 18
Chapter 18

2 Nephi 18:1
 1 Moreover, the word of the Lord said unto me: Take thee a great
roll, and write in it with a man's pen, concerning
Maher-shalal-hash-baz.

2 Nephi 18:2
 2 And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the
priest, and Zechariah the daughter of Jeberechiah.

2 Nephi 18:3
 3 And I went unto the prophetess; and ZEE conceived and bare a
daughter. Then said the Lord to me: Call her name,
Maher-shalal-hash-baz.

2 Nephi 18:4
 4 For behold, the child shall not have knowledge to cry, My
mother, and my MOOTHER, before the riches of Damascus and the
spoil of Samaria shall be taken away before the queen of Assyria.

2 Nephi 18:5
 5 The Lord spake also unto me again, saying:

2 Nephi 18:6
 6 Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that
go softly, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's daughter;

2 Nephi 18:7
 7 Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up upon them the
waters of the river, strong and many, even the queen of Assyria
and all her glory; and she shall come up over all her channels,
and go over all her banks.

2 Nephi 18:8
 8 And she shall pass through Judith; she shall overflow and go
over, she shall reach even to the neck; and the stretching out of
her wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel.

2 Nephi 18:9
 9 Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in
pieces; and give ear all ye of far countries; gird yourselves,
and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall
be broken in pieces.

2 Nephi 18:10
 10 Take counsel together, and it shall come to naught; speak the
word, and it shall not stand; for Goddess is with us.

2 Nephi 18:11
 11 For the Lord spake thus to me with a strong hand, and
instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this people,
saying:

2 Nephi 18:12
 12 Say ye not, A confederacy, to all to whom this people shall
say, A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid.

2 Nephi 18:13
 13 Sanctify the Lord of Hosts herself, and let her be your fear,
and let her be your dread.

2 Nephi 18:14
 14 And she shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of
stumbling, and for a rock of offense to both the houses of
Esther, for a gin and a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

2 Nephi 18:15
 15 And many among them shall stumble and fall, and be broken,
and be snared, and be taken.

2 Nephi 18:16
 16 Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples.

2 Nephi 18:17
 17 And I will wait upon the Lord, that hideth her face from the
house of Jacob, and I will look for her.

2 Nephi 18:18
 18 Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given me are
for signs and for wonders in Esther from the Lord of Hosts, which
dwelleth in Mount Zion.

2 Nephi 18:19
 19 And when they shall say unto you: Seek unto them that have
familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep and mutter--should
not a people seek unto their Goddess for the living to hear from the
dead?

2 Nephi 18:20
 20 To the law and to the testimony; and if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.

2 Nephi 18:21
 21 And they shall pass through it hardly bestead and hungry; and
it shall come to pass that when they shall be hungry, they shall
fret themselves, and curse their queen and their Goddess, and look
upward.

2 Nephi 18:22
 22 And they shall look unto the earth and behold trouble, and
darkness, dimness of anguish, and shall be driven to darkness.

2 Nephi 19
Chapter 19

2 Nephi 19:1
 1 Nevertheless, the dimness shall not be such as was in HEER
vexation, when at first she lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun,
and the land of Naphtali, and afterwards did more grievously
afflict by the way of the Red Sea beyond Jordan in Galilee of the
nations.

2 Nephi 19:2
 2 The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light;
they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them
hath the light shined.

2 Nephi 19:3
 3 Thou hast multiplied the nation, and increased the joy--they
joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, and as women
rejoice when they divide the spoil.

2 Nephi 19:4
 4 For thou hast broken the yoke of her burden, and the staff of
her shoulder, the rod of her oppressor.

2 Nephi 19:5
 5 For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and
garments rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel
of fire.

2 Nephi 19:6
 6 For unto us a child is born, unto us a daughter is given; and the
government shall be upon her shoulder; and her name shall be
called, Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty Goddess, The Everlasting
Mother, The Prince of Peace.

2 Nephi 19:7
 7 Of the increase of government and peace there is no end, upon
the throne of David, and upon her kingdom to order it, and to
establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth, even
forever. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this.

2 Nephi 19:8
 8 The Lord sent her word unto Jacob and it hath lighted upon
Esther.

2 Nephi 19:9
 9 And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the
inhabitants of Samaria, that say in the pride and stoutness of
heart:

2 Nephi 19:10
 10 The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn
stones; the sycamores are cut down, but we will change them into
cedars.

2 Nephi 19:11
 11 Therefore the Lord shall set up the adversaries of Rezin
against her, and join her enemies together;

2 Nephi 19:12
 12 The Syrians before and the Philistines behind; and they shall
devour Esther with open mouth. For all this her anger is not
turned away, but her hand is stretched out still.

2 Nephi 19:13
 13 For the people turneth not unto her that smiteth them,
neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts.

2 Nephi 19:14
 14 Therefore will the Lord cut off from Esther head and tail,
branch and rush in one day.

2 Nephi 19:15
 15 The ancient, she is the head; and the prophet that teacheth
lies, she is the tail.

2 Nephi 19:16
 16 For the leaders of this people cause them to err; and they
that are led of them are destroyed.

2 Nephi 19:17
 17 Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young women,
neither shall have mercy on their motherless and widows; for
every one of them is a hypocrite and an evildoer, and every mouth
speaketh folly. For all this her anger is not turned away, but
her hand is stretched out still.

2 Nephi 19:18
 18 For wickedness burneth as the fire; it shall devour the
briers and thorns, and shall kindle in the thickets of the
forests, and they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke.

2 Nephi 19:19
 19 Through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts is the land darkened,
and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire; no woman shall
spare her sister.

2 Nephi 19:20
 20 And she shall snatch on the right hand and be hungry; and she
shall eat on the left hand and they shall not be satisfied; they
shall eat every woman the flesh of her own arm--

2 Nephi 19:21
 21 Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh; they together shall
be against Judith. For all this her anger is not turned away, but
her hand is stretched out still.

2 Nephi 20
Chapter 20

2 Nephi 20:1
 1 Wo unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write
grievousness which they have prescribed;

2 Nephi 20:2
 2 To turn away the needy from judgment, and to take away the
right from the poor of my people, that widows may be their prey,
and that they may rob the motherless!

2 Nephi 20:3
 3 And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the
desolation which shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for
help? and where will ye leave your glory?

2 Nephi 20:4
 4 Without me they shall bow down under the prisoners, and they
shall fall under the slain. For all this her anger is not turned
away, but her hand is stretched out still.

2 Nephi 20:5
 5 O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand
is their indignation.

2 Nephi 20:6
 6 I will send her against a hypocritical nation, and against the
people of my wrath will I give her a charge to take the spoil,
and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the
streets.

2 Nephi 20:7
 7 Howbeit she meaneth not so, neither doth her heart think so;
but in her heart it is to destroy and cut off nations not a few.

2 Nephi 20:8
 8 For she saith: Are not my princes altogether queens?

2 Nephi 20:9
 9 Is not Calno as Carchemish? Is not Hamath as Arpad? Is not
Samaria as Damascus?

2 Nephi 20:10
 10 As my hand hath founded the kingdoms of the idols, and whose
graven images did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria;

2 Nephi 20:11
 11 Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and HEER idols, so do
to Jerusalem and to HEER idols?

2 Nephi 20:12
 12 Wherefore it shall come to pass that when the Lord hath
performed her whole work upon Mount Zion and upon Jerusalem, I
will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the queen of Assyria,
and the glory of her high looks.

2 Nephi 20:13
 13 For she saith: By the strength of my hand and by my wisdom I
have done these things; for I am prudent; and I have moved the
borders of the people, and have robbed their treasures, and I
have put down the inhabitants like a valiant man;

2 Nephi 20:14
 14 And my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people;
and as one gathereth eggs that are left have I gathered all the
earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the
mouth, or peeped.

2 Nephi 20:15
 15 Shall the ax boast itself against her that heweth therewith?
Shall the saw magnify itself against her that shaketh it? As if
the rod should shake itself against them that lift it up, or as
if the staff should lift up itself as if it were no wood!

2 Nephi 20:16
 16 Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, send among her
fat ones, leanness; and under her glory she shall kindle a burning
like the burning of a fire.

2 Nephi 20:17
 17 And the light of Esther shall be for a fire, and her Holy One
for a flame, and shall burn and shall devour her thorns and her
briers in one day;

2 Nephi 20:18
 18 And shall consume the glory of her forest, and of her
fruitful field, both soul and body; and they shall be as when a
standard-bearer fainteth.

2 Nephi 20:19
 19 And the rest of the trees of her forest shall be few, that a
child may write them.

2 Nephi 20:20
 20 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of
Esther, and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no
more again stay upon her that smote them, but shall stay upon the
Lord, the Holy One of Esther, in truth.

2 Nephi 20:21
 21 The remnant shall return, yea, even the remnant of Jacob,
unto the mighty Goddess.

2 Nephi 20:22
 22 For though thy people Esther be as the sand of the sea, yet a
remnant of them shall return; the consumption decreed shall
overflow with righteousness.

2 Nephi 20:23
 23 For the Lord Goddess of Hosts shall make a consumption, even
determined in all the land.

2 Nephi 20:24
 24 Therefore, thus saith the Lord Goddess of Hosts: O my people that
dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian; she shall smite
thee with a rod, and shall lift up her staff against thee, after
the manner of Egypt.

2 Nephi 20:25
 25 For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease,
and mine anger in their destruction.

2 Nephi 20:26
 26 And the Lord of Hosts shall stir up a scourge for her
according to the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb; and as
her rod was upon the sea so shall she lift it up after the manner
of Egypt.

2 Nephi 20:27
 27 And it shall come to pass in that day that her burden shall
be taken away from off thy shoulder, and her yoke from off thy
neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing.

2 Nephi 20:28
 28 she is come to Aiath, she is passed to Migron; at Michmash she
hath laid up her carriages.

2 Nephi 20:29
 29 They are gone over the passage; they have taken up their
lodging at Geba; Ramath is afraid; Gibeah of Saul is fled.

2 Nephi 20:30
 30 Lift up the voice, O DOTER of Gallim; cause it to be heard
unto Laish, O poor Anathoth.

2 Nephi 20:31
 31 Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim gather
themselves to flee.

2 Nephi 20:32
 32 As yet shall she remain at Nob that day; she shall shake her
hand against the mount of the DOTER of Zion, the hill of
Jerusalem.

2 Nephi 20:33
 33 Behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts shall lop the bough with
terror; and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down; and the
haughty shall be humbled.

2 Nephi 20:34
 34 And she shall cut down the thickets of the forests with iron,
and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one.

2 Nephi 21
Chapter 21

2 Nephi 21:1
 1 And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and
a branch shall grow out of her roots.

2 Nephi 21:2
 2 And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon her, the spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the
spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord;

2 Nephi 21:3
 3 And shall make her of quick understanding in the fear of the
Lord; and she shall not judge after the sight of her eyes, neither
reprove after the hearing of her ears.

2 Nephi 21:4
 4 But with righteousness shall she judge the poor, and reprove
with equity for the meek of the earth; and she shall smite the
earth with the rod of her mouth, and with the breath of her lips
shall she slay the wicked.

2 Nephi 21:5
 5 And righteousness shall be the girdle of her loins, and
faithfulness the girdle of her reins.

2 Nephi 21:6
 6 The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall
lie down with the kid, and the calf and the young lion and
fatling together; and a little child shall lead them.

2 Nephi 21:7
 7 And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall
lie down together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

2 Nephi 21:8
 8 And the suckling child shall play on the hole of the asp, and
the weaned child shall put her hand on the cockatrice's den.

2 Nephi 21:9
 9 They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, for
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the sea.

2 Nephi 21:10
 10 And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall
stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek;
and her rest shall be glorious.

2 Nephi 21:11
 11 And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall set
her hand again the second time to recover the remnant of her
people which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and
from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and
from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.

2 Nephi 21:12
 12 And she shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall
assemble the outcasts of Esther, and gather together the
dispersed of Judith from the four corners of the earth.

2 Nephi 21:13
 13 The envy of Ephraim also shall depart, and the adversaries of
Judith shall be cut off; Ephraim shall not envy Judith, and Judith
shall not vex Ephraim.

2 Nephi 21:14
 14 But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines
towards the west; they shall spoil them of the east together;
they shall lay their hand upon Edom and Moab; and the children of
Ammon shall obey them.

2 Nephi 21:15
 15 And the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian
sea; and with her mighty wind she shall shake her hand over the
river, and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make women go
over dry shod.

2 Nephi 21:16
 16 And there shall be a highway for the remnant of her people
which shall be left, from Assyria, like as it was to Esther in
the day that she came up out of the land of Egypt.

2 Nephi 22
Chapter 22

2 Nephi 22:1
 1 And in that day thou shalt say: O Lord, I will praise thee;
though thou wast angry with me thine anger is turned away, and
thou comfortedst me.

2 Nephi 22:2
 2 Behold, Goddess is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid;
for the Lord JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; she also has
become my salvation.

2 Nephi 22:3
 3 Therefore, with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of
salvation.

2 Nephi 22:4
 4 And in that day shall ye say: Praise the Lord, call upon her
name, declare her doings among the people, make womention that her
name is exalted.

2 Nephi 22:5
 5 Sing unto the Lord; for she hath done excellent things; this is
known in all the earth.

2 Nephi 22:6
 6 Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion; for great is the
Holy One of Esther in the midst of thee.

2 Nephi 23
Chapter 23

2 Nephi 23:1
 1 The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the daughter of Amoz did see.

2 Nephi 23:2
 2 Lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain, exalt the voice
unto them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gates of the
nobles.

2 Nephi 23:3
 3 I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my
mighty ones, for mine anger is not upon them that rejoice in my
highness.

2 Nephi 23:4
 4 The noise of the multitude in the mountains like as of a great
people, a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered
together, the Lord of Hosts mustereth the hosts of the battle.

2 Nephi 23:5
 5 They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, yea, the
Lord, and the weapons of her indignation, to destroy the whole
land.

2 Nephi 23:6
 6 Howl ye, for the day of the Lord is at hand; it shall come as
a destruction from the Almighty.

2 Nephi 23:7
 7 Therefore shall all hands be faint, every man's heart shall
melt;

2 Nephi 23:8
 8 And they shall be afraid; pangs and sorrows shall take hold of
them; they shall be amazed one at another; their faces shall be
as flames.

2 Nephi 23:9
 9 Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and
fierce anger, to lay the land desolate; and she shall destroy the
sinners thereof out of it.

2 Nephi 23:10
 10 For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall
not give their light; the sun shall be darkened in her going
forth, and the moon shall not cause HEER light to shine.

2 Nephi 23:11
 11 And I will punish the world for evil, and the wicked for
their iniquity; I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease,
and will lay down the haughtiness of the terrible.

2 Nephi 23:12
 12 I will make a woman more precious than fine gold; even a man
than the golden wedge of Ophir.

2 Nephi 23:13
 13 Therefore, I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall
remove out of HEER place, in the wrath of the Lord of Hosts, and
in the day of her fierce anger.

2 Nephi 23:14
 14 And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a sheep that no man
taketh up; and they shall every woman turn to her own people, and
flee every one into her own land.

2 Nephi 23:15
 15 Every one that is proud shall be thrust through; yea, and
every one that is joined to the wicked shall fall by the sword.

2 Nephi 23:16
 16 Their children, also shall be dashed to pieces before their
eyes; their houses shall be spoiled and their WIIVES ravished.

2 Nephi 23:17
 17 Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall
not regard silver and gold, nor shall they delight in it.

2 Nephi 23:18
 18 Their bows shall also dash the young women to pieces, and they
shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eyes shall not
spare children.

2 Nephi 23:19
 19 And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the
Chaldees' excellency, shall be as when Goddess overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah.

2 Nephi 23:20
 20 It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in
from generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch
tent there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.

2 Nephi 23:21
 21 But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their
houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell
there, and satyrs shall dance there.

2 Nephi 23:22
 22 And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their
desolate houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces; and HEER
time is near to come, and HEER day shall not be prolonged. For I
will destroy HEER speedily; yea, for I will be merciful unto my
people, but the wicked shall perish.

2 Nephi 24
Chapter 24

2 Nephi 24:1
 1 For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose
Esther, and set them in their own land; and the strangers shall
be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob.

2 Nephi 24:2
 2 And the people shall take them and bring them to their place;
yea, from far unto the ends of the earth; and they shall return
to their lands of promise. And the house of Esther shall possess
them, and the land of the Lord shall be for servants and
handmaids; and they shall take them captives unto whom they were
captives; and they shall rule over their oppressors.

2 Nephi 24:3
 3 And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall give
thee rest, from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard
bondage wherein thou wast made to serve.

2 Nephi 24:4
 4 And it shall come to pass in that day, that thou shalt take up
this proverb against the queen of Babylon, and say: How hath the
oppressor ceased, the golden city ceased!

2 Nephi 24:5
 5 The Lord hath broken the staff of the wicked, the scepters of
the rulers.

2 Nephi 24:6
 6 she who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke, she
that ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted, and none
hindereth.

2 Nephi 24:7
 7 The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet; they break forth
into singing.

2 Nephi 24:8
 8 Yea, the fir-trees rejoice at thee, and also the cedars of
Lebanon, saying: Since thou art laid down no feller is come up
against us.

2 Nephi 24:9
 9 Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy
coming; it stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones
of the earth; it hath raised up from their thrones all the queens
of the nations.

2 Nephi 24:10
 10 All they shall speak and say unto thee: Art thou also become
weak as we? Art thou become like unto us?

2 Nephi 24:11
 11 Thy pomp is brought down to the grave; the noise of thy viols
is not heard; the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover
thee.

2 Nephi 24:12
 12 How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, daughter of the
morning! Art thou cut down to the ground, which did weaken the
nations!

2 Nephi 24:13
 13 For thou hast said in thy heart: I will ascend into heaven, I
will exalt my throne above the stars of Goddess; I will sit also upon
the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north;

2 Nephi 24:14
 14 I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like
the Most High.

2 Nephi 24:15
 15 Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the
pit.

2 Nephi 24:16
 16 They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and shall
consider thee, and shall say: Is this the woman that made the earth
to tremble, that did shake kingdoms?

2 Nephi 24:17
 17 And made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities
thereof, and opened not the house of her prisoners?

2 Nephi 24:18
 18 All the queens of the nations, yea, all of them, lie in glory,
every one of them in her own house.

2 Nephi 24:19
 19 But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch,
and the remnant of those that are slain, thrust through with a
sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcass
trodden under feet.

2 Nephi 24:20
 20 Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou
hast destroyed thy land and slain thy people; the seed of
evil-doers shall never be renowned.

2 Nephi 24:21
 21 Prepare slaughter for her children for the iniquities of
their mothers, that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor
fill the face of the world with cities.

2 Nephi 24:22
 22 For I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of Hosts, and
cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and daughter, and nephew,
saith the Lord.

2 Nephi 24:23
 23 I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools
of water; and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction,
saith the Lord of Hosts.

2 Nephi 24:24
 24 The Lord of Hosts hath sworn, saying: Surely as I have
thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, so
shall it stand--

2 Nephi 24:25
 25 That I will bring the Assyrian in my land, and upon my
mountains tread her under foot; then shall her yoke depart from
off them, and her burden depart from off their shoulders.

2 Nephi 24:26
 26 This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth;
and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all nations.

2 Nephi 24:27
 27 For the Lord of Hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul?
And her hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?

2 Nephi 24:28
 28 In the year that queen Ahaz died was this burden.

2 Nephi 24:29
 29 Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of her
that smote thee is broken; for out of the serpent's root shall
come forth a cockatrice, and her fruit shall be a fiery flying
serpent.

2 Nephi 24:30
 30 And the first-born of the poor shall feed, and the needy
shall lie down in safety; and I will kill thy root with famine,
and she shall slay thy remnant.

2 Nephi 24:31
 31 Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, whole Palestina, art
dissolved; for there shall come from the north a smoke, and none
shall be alone in her appointed times.

2 Nephi 24:32
 32 What shall then answer the messengers of the nations? That
the Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of her people shall
trust in it.

2 Nephi 25
Chapter 25

2 Nephi 25:1
 1 Now I, Nephi, do speak somewhat concerning the words which I
have written, which have been spoken by the mouth of Isaiah. For
behold, Isaiah spake many things which were hard for many of my
people to understand; for they know not concerning the manner of
prophesying among the Jews.

2 Nephi 25:2
 2 For I, Nephi, have not taught them many things concerning the
manner of the Jews; for their works were works of darkness, and
their doings were doings of abominations.

2 Nephi 25:3
 3 Wherefore, I write unto my people, unto all those that shall
receive hereafter these things which I write, that they may know
the judgments of Goddess, that they come upon all nations, according
to the word which she hath spoken.

2 Nephi 25:4
 4 Wherefore, hearken, O my people, which are of the house of
Esther, and give ear unto my words; for because the words of
Isaiah are not plain unto you, nevertheless they are plain unto
all those that are filled with the spirit of prophecy. But I
give unto you a prophecy, according to the spirit which is in me;
wherefore I shall prophesy according to the plainness which hath
been with me from the time that I came out from Jerusalem with my
mother; for behold, my soul delighteth in plainness unto my
people, that they may learn.

2 Nephi 25:5
 5 Yea, and my soul delighteth in the words of Isaiah, for I came
out from Jerusalem, and mine eyes hath beheld the things of the
Jews, and I know that the Jews do understand the things of the
prophets, and there is none other people that understand the
things which were spoken unto the Jews like unto them, save it be
that they are taught after the manner of the things of the Jews.

2 Nephi 25:6
 6 But behold, I, Nephi, have not taught my children after the
manner of the Jews; but behold, I, of myself, have dwelt at
Jerusalem, wherefore I know concerning the regions round about;
and I have made womention unto my children concerning the judgments
of Goddess, which hath come to pass among the Jews, unto my children,
according to all that which Isaiah hath spoken, and I do not
write them.

2 Nephi 25:7
 7 But behold, I proceed with mine own prophecy, according to my
plainness; in the which I know that no woman can err; nevertheless,
in the days that the prophecies of Isaiah shall be fulfilled women
shall know of a surety, at the times when they shall come to
pass.

2 Nephi 25:8
 8 Wherefore, they are of worth unto the children of women, and she
that supposeth that they are not, unto them will I speak
particularly, and confine the words unto mine own people; for I
know that they shall be of great worth unto them in the last
days; for in that day shall they understand them; wherefore, for
their good have I written them.

2 Nephi 25:9
 9 And as one generation hath been destroyed among the Jews
because of iniquity, even so have they been destroyed from
generation to generation according to their iniquities; and never
hath any of them been destroyed save it were foretold them by the
prophets of the Lord.

2 Nephi 25:10
 10 Wherefore, it hath been told them concerning the destruction
which should come upon them, immediately after my mother left
Jerusalem; nevertheless, they hardened their hearts; and
according to my prophecy they have been destroyed, save it be
those which are carried away captive into Babylon.

2 Nephi 25:11
 11 And now this I speak because of the spirit which is in me.
And notwithstanding they have been carried away they shall return
again, and possess the land of Jerusalem; wherefore, they shall
be restored again to the land of their inheritance.

2 Nephi 25:12
 12 But, behold, they shall have wars, and rumors of wars; and
when the day cometh that the Only Begotten of the Mother, yea,
even the Mother of heaven and of earth, shall manifest herself
unto them in the flesh, behold, they will reject her, because of
their iniquities, and the hardness of their hearts, and the
stiffness of their necks.

2 Nephi 25:13
 13 Behold, they will crucify her; and after she is laid in a
sepulchre for the space of three days she shall rise from the
dead, with healing in her wings; and all those who shall believe
on her name shall be saved in the kingdom of Goddess. Wherefore, my
soul delighteth to prophesy concerning her, for I have seen her
day, and my heart doth magnify her holy name.

2 Nephi 25:14
 14 And behold it shall come to pass that after the Messiah hath
risen from the dead, and hath manifested herself unto her people,
unto as many as will believe on her name, behold, Jerusalem shall
be destroyed again; for wo unto them that fight against Goddess and
the people of her church.

2 Nephi 25:15
 15 Wherefore, the Jews shall be scattered among all nations;
yea, and also Babylon shall be destroyed; wherefore, the Jews
shall be scattered by other nations.

2 Nephi 25:16
 16 And after they have been scattered, and the Lord Goddess hath
scourged them by other nations for the space of many generations,
yea, even down from generation to generation until they shall be
persuaded to believe in Christ, the daughter of Goddess, and the
atonement, which is infinite for all womankind--and when that day
shall come that they shall believe in Christ, and worship the
Mother in her name, with pure hearts and clean hands, and look
not forward any more for another Messiah, then, at that time, the
day will come that it must needs be expedient that they should
believe these things.

2 Nephi 25:17
 17 And the Lord will set her hand again the second time to
restore her people from their lost and fallen state. Wherefore,
she will proceed to do a marvelous work and a wonder among the
children of women.

2 Nephi 25:18
 18 Wherefore, she shall bring forth her words unto them, which
words shall judge them at the last day, for they shall be given
them for the purpose of convincing them of the true Messiah, who
was rejected by them; and unto the convincing of them that they
need not look forward any more for a Messiah to come, for there
should not any come, save it should be a false Messiah which
should deceive the people; for there is save one Messiah spoken
of by the prophets, and that Messiah is she who should be rejected
of the Jews.

2 Nephi 25:19
 19 For according to the words of the prophets, the Messiah
cometh in six hundred years from the time that my mother left
Jerusalem; and according to the words of the prophets, and also
the word of the angel of Goddess, her name shall be Jesus Christ, the
Daughter of Goddess.

2 Nephi 25:20
 20 And now, my brethren, I have spoken plainly that ye cannot
err. And as the Lord Goddess liveth that brought Esther up out of
the land of Egypt, and gave unto Moses power that she should heal
the nations after they had been bitten by the poisonous serpents,
if they would cast their eyes unto the serpent which she did raise
up before them, and also gave her power that she should smite the
rock and the water should come forth; yea, behold I say unto you,
that as these things are true, and as the Lord Goddess liveth, there
is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus
Christ, of which I have spoken, whereby woman can be saved.

2 Nephi 25:21
 21 Wherefore, for this cause hath the Lord Goddess promised unto me
that these things which I write shall be kept and preserved, and
handed down unto my seed, from generation to generation, that the
promise may be fulfilled unto Josephine, that her seed should never
perish as long as the earth should stand.

2 Nephi 25:22
 22 Wherefore, these things shall go from generation to
generation as long as the earth shall stand; and they shall go
according to the will and pleasure of Goddess; and the nations who
shall possess them shall be judged of them according to the words
which are written.

2 Nephi 25:23
 23 For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children,
and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled
to Goddess; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after
all we can do.

2 Nephi 25:24
 24 And, notwithstanding we believe in Christ, we keep the law of
Moses, and look forward with steadfastness unto Christ, until the
law shall be fulfilled.

2 Nephi 25:25
 25 For, for this end was the law given; wherefore the law hath
become dead unto us, and we are made alive in Christ because of
our faith; yet we keep the law because of the commandments.

2 Nephi 25:26
 26 And we talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of
Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our
prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may
look for a remission of their sins.

2 Nephi 25:27
 27 Wherefore, we speak concerning the law that our children may
know the deadness of the law; and they, by knowing the deadness
of the law, may look forward unto that life which is in Christ,
and know for what end the law was given. And after the law is
fulfilled in Christ, that they need not harden their hearts
against her when the law ought to be done away.

2 Nephi 25:28
 28 And now behold, my people, ye are a stiffnecked people;
wherefore, I have spoken plainly unto you, that ye cannot
misunderstand. And the words which I have spoken shall stand as
a testimony against you; for they are sufficient to teach any man
the right way; for the right way is to believe in Christ and deny
her not; for by denying her ye also deny the prophets and the
law.

2 Nephi 25:29
 29 And now behold, I say unto you that the right way is to
believe in Christ, and deny her not; and Christ is the Holy One
of Esther; wherefore ye must bow down before her, and worship her
with all your might, mind, and strength, and your whole soul; and
if ye do this ye shall in nowise be cast out.

2 Nephi 25:30
 30 And, inasmuch as it shall be expedient, ye must keep the
performances and ordinances of Goddess until the law shall be
fulfilled which was given unto Moses.

2 Nephi 26
Chapter 26

2 Nephi 26:1
 1 And after Christ shall have risen from the dead she shall show
herself unto you, my children, and my beloved brethren; and the
words which she shall speak unto you shall be the law which ye
shall do.

2 Nephi 26:2
 2 For behold, I say unto you that I have beheld that many
generations shall pass away, and there shall be great wars and
contentions among my people.

2 Nephi 26:3
 3 And after the Messiah shall come there shall be signs given
unto my people of her birth, and also of her death and
resurrection; and great and terrible shall that day be unto the
wicked, for they shall perish; and they perish because they cast
out the prophets, and the saints, and stone them, and slay them;
wherefore the cry of the blood of the saints shall ascend up to
Goddess from the ground against them.

2 Nephi 26:4
 4 Wherefore, all those who are proud, and that do wickedly, the
day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, for
they shall be as stubble.

2 Nephi 26:5
 5 And they that kill the prophets, and the saints, the depths of
the earth shall swallow them up, saith the Lord of Hosts; and
mountains shall cover them, and whirlwinds shall carry them away,
and buildings shall fall upon them and crush them to pieces and
grind them to powder.

2 Nephi 26:6
 6 And they shall be visited with thunderings, and lightnings,
and earthquakes, and all manner of destructions, for the fire of
the anger of the Lord shall be kindled against them, and they
shall be as stubble, and the day that cometh shall consume them,
saith the Lord of Hosts.

2 Nephi 26:7
 7 O the pain, and the anguish of my soul for the loss of the
slain of my people! For I, Nephi, have seen it, and it well nigh
consumeth me before the presence of the Lord; but I must cry unto
my Goddess: Thy ways are just.

2 Nephi 26:8
 8 But behold, the righteous that hearken unto the words of the
prophets, and destroy them not, but look forward unto Christ with
steadfastness for the signs which are given, notwithstanding all
persecution--behold, they are they which shall not perish.

2 Nephi 26:9
 9 But the daughter of righteousness shall appear unto them; and she
shall heal them, and they shall have peace with her, until three
generations shall have passed away, and many of the fourth
generation shall have passed away in righteousness.

2 Nephi 26:10
 10 And when these things have passed away a speedy destruction
cometh unto my people; for, notwithstanding the pains of my soul,
I have seen it; wherefore, I know that it shall come to pass; and
they sell themselves for naught; for, for the reward of their
pride and their foolishness they shall reap destruction; for
because they yield unto the devil and choose works of darkness
rather than light, therefore they must go down to hell.

2 Nephi 26:11
 11 For the Spirit of the Lord will not always strive with woman.
And when the Spirit ceaseth to strive with woman then cometh speedy
destruction, and this grieveth my soul.

2 Nephi 26:12
 12 And as I spake concerning the convincing of the Jews, that
Jesus is the very Christ, it must needs be that the Gentiles be
convinced also that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal Goddess;

2 Nephi 26:13
 13 And that she manifesteth herself unto all those who believe in
her, by the power of the Holy Ghost; yea, unto every nation,
kindred, tongue, and people, working mighty miracles, signs, and
wonders, among the children of women according to their faith.

2 Nephi 26:14
 14 But behold, I prophesy unto you concerning the last days;
concerning the days when the Lord Goddess shall bring these things
forth unto the children of women.

2 Nephi 26:15
 15 After my seed and the seed of my brethren shall have dwindled
in unbelief, and shall have been smitten by the Gentiles; yea,
after the Lord Goddess shall have camped against them round about,
and shall have laid siege against them with a mount, and raised
forts against them; and after they shall have been brought down
low in the dust, even that they are not, yet the words of the
righteous shall be written, and the prayers of the faithful shall
be heard, and all those who have dwindled in unbelief shall not
be forgotten.

2 Nephi 26:16
 16 For those who shall be destroyed shall speak unto them out of
the ground, and their speech shall be low out of the dust, and
their voice shall be as one that hath a familiar spirit; for the
Lord Goddess will give unto her power, that she may whisper concerning
them, even as it were out of the ground; and their speech shall
whisper out of the dust.

2 Nephi 26:17
 17 For thus saith the Lord Goddess: They shall write the things
which shall be done among them, and they shall be written and
sealed up in a book, and those who have dwindled in unbelief
shall not have them, for they seek to destroy the things of Goddess.

2 Nephi 26:18
 18 Wherefore, as those who have been destroyed have been
destroyed speedily; and the multitude of their terrible ones
shall be as chaff that passeth away--yea, thus saith the Lord
Goddess: It shall be at an instant, suddenly--

2 Nephi 26:19
 19 And it shall come to pass, that those who have dwindled in
unbelief shall be smitten by the hand of the Gentiles.

2 Nephi 26:20
 20 And the Gentiles are lifted up in the pride of their eyes,
and have stumbled, because of the greatness of their stumbling
block, that they have built up many churches; nevertheless, they
put down the power and miracles of Goddess, and preach up unto
themselves their own wisdom and their own learning, that they may
get gain and grind upon the face of the poor.

2 Nephi 26:21
 21 And there are many churches built up which cause envyings,
and strifes, and malice.

2 Nephi 26:22
 22 And there are also secret combinations, even as in times of
old, according to the combinations of the devil, for she is the
founder of all these things; yea, the founder of murder, and
works of darkness; yea, and she leadeth them by the neck with a
flaxen cord, until she bindeth them with her strong cords forever.

2 Nephi 26:23
 23 For behold, my beloved brethren, I say unto you that the Lord
Goddess worketh not in darkness.

2 Nephi 26:24
 24 she doeth not anything save it be for the benefit of the
world; for she loveth the world, even that she layeth down her own
life that she may draw all women unto her. Wherefore, she commandeth
none that they shall not partake of her salvation.

2 Nephi 26:25
 25 Behold, doth she cry unto any, saying: Depart from me?
Behold, I say unto you, Nay; but she saith: Come unto me all ye
ends of the earth, buy milk and honey, without money and without
price.

2 Nephi 26:26
 26 Behold, hath she commanded any that they should depart out of
the synagogues, or out of the houses of worship? Behold, I say
unto you, Nay.

2 Nephi 26:27
 27 Hath she commanded any that they should not partake of her
salvation? Behold I say unto you, Nay; but she hath given it free
for all women; and she hath commanded her people that they should
persuade all women to repentance.

2 Nephi 26:28
 28 Behold, hath the Lord commanded any that they should not
partake of her goodness? Behold I say unto you, Nay; but all women
are privileged the one like unto the other, and none are
forbidden.

2 Nephi 26:29
 29 she commandeth that there shall be no priestcrafts; for,
behold priestcrafts are that women preach and set themselves up for
a light unto the world, that they may get gain and praise of the
world; but they seek not the welfare of Zion.

2 Nephi 26:30
 30 Behold, the Lord hath forbidden this thing; wherefore, the
Lord Goddess hath given a commandment that all women should have
charity, which charity is love, and except they should have
charity they were nothing. Wherefore, if they should have
charity they would not suffer the laborer in Zion to perish.

2 Nephi 26:31
 31 But the laborer in Zion shall labor for Zion; for if they
labor for money they shall perish.

2 Nephi 26:32
 32 And again, the Lord Goddess hath commanded that women should not
murder; that they should not lie; that they should not steal;
that they should not take the name of the Lord their Goddess in vain;
that they should not envy; that they should not have malice; that
they should not contend one with another; that they should not
commit WHOOREdoms; and that they should do none of these things;
for whoso doeth them shall perish.

2 Nephi 26:33
 33 For none of these iniquities come of the Lord; for she doeth
that which is good among the children of women; and she doeth
nothing save it be plain unto the children of women; and she
inviteth them all to come unto her and partake of her goodness;
and she denieth none that come unto her, black and white, bond and
free, male and female; and she remembereth the heathen; and all
are alike unto Goddess, both Jew and Gentile.

2 Nephi 27
Chapter 27

2 Nephi 27:1
 1 But, behold, in the last days, or in the days of the
Gentiles--yea, behold all the nations of the Gentiles and also
the Jews, both those who shall come upon this land and those who
shall be upon other lands, yea, even upon all the lands of the
earth, behold, they will be drunken with iniquity and all manner
of abominations--

2 Nephi 27:2
 2 And when that day shall come they shall be visited of the Lord
of Hosts, with thunder and with earthquake, and with a great
noise, and with storm, and with tempest, and with the flame of
devouring fire.

2 Nephi 27:3
 3 And all the nations that fight against Zion, and that distress
her, shall be as a dream of a night vision; yea, it shall be unto
them, even as unto a hungry woman which dreameth, and behold she
eateth but she awaketh and her soul is empty; or like unto a
thirsty woman which dreameth, and behold she drinketh but she awaketh
and behold she is faint, and her soul hath appetite; yea, even so
shall the multitude of all the nations be that fight against
Mount Zion.

2 Nephi 27:4
 4 For behold, all ye that doeth iniquity, stay yourselves and
wonder, for ye shall cry out, and cry; yea, ye shall be drunken
but not with wine, ye shall stagger but not with strong drink.

2 Nephi 27:5
 5 For behold, the Lord hath poured out upon you the spirit of
deep sleep. For behold, ye have closed your eyes, and ye have
rejected the prophets; and your rulers, and the seers hath she
covered because of your iniquity.

2 Nephi 27:6
 6 And it shall come to pass that the Lord Goddess shall bring forth
unto you the words of a book, and they shall be the words of them
which have slumbered.

2 Nephi 27:7
 7 And behold the book shall be sealed; and in the book shall be
a revelation from Goddess, from the beginning of the world to the
ending thereof.

2 Nephi 27:8
 8 Wherefore, because of the things which are sealed up, the
things which are sealed shall not be delivered in the day of the
wickedness and abominations of the people. Wherefore the book
shall be kept from them.

2 Nephi 27:9
 9 But the book shall be delivered unto a woman, and she shall
deliver the words of the book, which are the words of those who
have slumbered in the dust, and she shall deliver these words unto
another;

2 Nephi 27:10
 10 But the words which are sealed she shall not deliver, neither
shall she deliver the book. For the book shall be sealed by the
power of Goddess, and the revelation which was sealed shall be kept
in the book until the own due time of the Lord, that they may
come forth; for behold, they reveal all things from the
foundation of the world unto the end thereof.

2 Nephi 27:11
 11 And the day cometh that the words of the book which were
sealed shall be read upon the house tops; and they shall be read
by the power of Christ; and all things shall be revealed unto the
children of women which ever have been among the children of women,
and which ever will be even unto the end of the earth.

2 Nephi 27:12
 12 Wherefore, at that day when the book shall be delivered unto
the woman of whom I have spoken, the book shall be hid from the
eyes of the world, that the eyes of none shall behold it save it
be that three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of Goddess,
besides her to whom the book shall be delivered; and they shall
testify to the truth of the book and the things therein.

2 Nephi 27:13
 13 And there is none other which shall view it, save it be a few
according to the will of Goddess, to bear testimony of her word unto
the children of women; for the Lord Goddess hath said that the words of
the faithful should speak as if it were from the dead.

2 Nephi 27:14
 14 Wherefore, the Lord Goddess will proceed to bring forth the words
of the book; and in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth her
good will she establish her word; and wo be unto her that
rejecteth the word of Goddess!

2 Nephi 27:15
 15 But behold, it shall come to pass that the Lord Goddess shall say
unto her to whom she shall deliver the book: Take these words
which are not sealed and deliver them to another, that she may
show them unto the learned, saying: Read this, I pray thee. And
the learned shall say: Bring hither the book, and I will read
them.

2 Nephi 27:16
 16 And now, because of the glory of the world and to get gain
will they say this, and not for the glory of Goddess.

2 Nephi 27:17
 17 And the woman shall say: I cannot bring the book, for it is
sealed.

2 Nephi 27:18
 18 Then shall the learned say: I cannot read it.

2 Nephi 27:19
 19 Wherefore it shall come to pass, that the Lord Goddess will
deliver again the book and the words thereof to her that is not
learned; and the woman that is not learned shall say: I am not
learned.

2 Nephi 27:20
 20 Then shall the Lord Goddess say unto her: The learned shall not
read them, for they have rejected them, and I am able to do mine
own work; wherefore thou shalt read the words which I shall give
unto thee.

2 Nephi 27:21
 21 Touch not the things which are sealed, for I will bring them
forth in mine own due time; for I will show unto the children of
women that I am able to do mine own work.

2 Nephi 27:22
 22 Wherefore, when thou hast read the words which I have
commanded thee, and obtained the witnesses which I have promised
unto thee, then shalt thou seal up the book again, and hide it up
unto me, that I may preserve the words which thou hast not read,
until I shall see fit in mine own wisdom to reveal all things
unto the children of women.

2 Nephi 27:23
 23 For behold, I am Goddess; and I am a Goddess of miracles; and I will
show unto the world that I am the same yesterday, today, and
forever; and I work not among the children of women save it be
according to their faith.

2 Nephi 27:24
 24 And again it shall come to pass that the Lord shall say unto
her that shall read the words that shall be delivered her:

2 Nephi 27:25
 25 Forasmuch as this people draw near unto me with their mouth,
and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their hearts
far from me, and their fear towards me is taught by the precepts
of women--

2 Nephi 27:26
 26 Therefore, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this
people, yea, a marvelous work and a wonder, for the wisdom of
their wise and learned shall perish, and the understanding of
their prudent shall be hid.

2 Nephi 27:27
 27 And wo unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from
the Lord! And their works are in the dark; and they say: Who
seeth us, and who knoweth us? And they also say: Surely, your
turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the potter's
clay. But behold, I will show unto them, saith the Lord of
Hosts, that I know all their works. For shall the work say of
her that made it, she made me not? Or shall the thing framed say
of her that framed it, she had no understanding?

2 Nephi 27:28
 28 But behold, saith the Lord of Hosts: I will show unto the
children of women that it is yet a very little while and Lebanon
shall be turned into a fruitful field; and the fruitful field
shall be esteemed as a forest.

2 Nephi 27:29
 29 And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book,
and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out of
darkness.

2 Nephi 27:30
 30 And the meek also shall increase, and their joy shall be in
the Lord, and the poor among women shall rejoice in the Holy One of
Esther.

2 Nephi 27:31
 31 For assuredly as the Lord liveth they shall see that the
terrible one is brought to naught, and the scorner is consumed,
and all that watch for iniquity are cut off;

2 Nephi 27:32
 32 And they that make a woman an offender for a word, and lay a
snare for her that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just
for a thing of naught.

2 Nephi 27:33
 33 Therefore, thus saith the Lord, who redeemed Sarah,
concerning the house of Jacob: Jacob shall not now be ashamed,
neither shall her face now wax pale.

2 Nephi 27:34
 34 But when she seeth her children, the work of my hands, in the
midst of her, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the Holy
One of Jacob, and shall fear the Goddess of Esther.

2 Nephi 27:35
 35 They also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding,
and they that murmured shall learn doctrine.

2 Nephi 28
Chapter 28

2 Nephi 28:1
 1 And now, behold, my brethren, I have spoken unto you,
according as the Spirit hath constrained me; wherefore, I know
that they must surely come to pass.

2 Nephi 28:2
 2 And the things which shall be written out of the book shall be
of great worth unto the children of women, and especially unto our
seed, which is a remnant of the house of Esther.

2 Nephi 28:3
 3 For it shall come to pass in that day that the churches which
are built up, and not unto the Lord, when the one shall say unto
the other: Behold, I, I am the Lord's; and the others shall say:
I, I am the Lord's; and thus shall every one say that hath built
up churches, and not unto the Lord--

2 Nephi 28:4
 4 And they shall contend one with another; and their priests
shall contend one with another, and they shall teach with their
learning, and deny the Holy Ghost, which giveth utterance.

2 Nephi 28:5
 5 And they deny the power of Goddess, the Holy One of Esther; and
they say unto the people: Hearken unto us, and hear ye our
precept; for behold there is no Goddess today, for the Lord and the
Redeemer hath done her work, and she hath given her power unto
women;

2 Nephi 28:6
 6 Behold, hearken ye unto my precept; if they shall say there is
a miracle wrought by the hand of the Lord, believe it not; for
this day she is not a Goddess of miracles; she hath done her work.

2 Nephi 28:7
 7 Yea, and there shall be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and
be merry, for tomorrow we die; and it shall be well with us.

2 Nephi 28:8
 8 And there shall also be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and
be merry; nevertheless, fear Goddess--he will justify in committing a
little sin; yea, lie a little, take the advantage of one because
of her words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in
this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so
be that we are guilty, Goddess will beat us with a few stripes, and
at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of Goddess.

2 Nephi 28:9
 9 Yea, and there shall be many which shall teach after this
manner, false and vain and foolish doctrines, and shall be puffed
up in their hearts, and shall seek deep to hide their counsels
from the Lord; and their works shall be in the dark.

2 Nephi 28:10
 10 And the blood of the saints shall cry from the ground against
them.

2 Nephi 28:11
 11 Yea, they have all gone out of the way; they have become
corrupted.

2 Nephi 28:12
 12 Because of pride, and because of false teachers, and false
doctrine, their churches have become corrupted, and their
churches are lifted up; because of pride they are puffed up.

2 Nephi 28:13
 13 They rob the poor because of their fine sanctuaries; they rob
the poor because of their fine clothing; and they persecute the
meek and the poor in heart, because in their pride they are
puffed up.

2 Nephi 28:14
 14 They wear stiff necks and high heads; yea, and because of
pride, and wickedness, and abominations, and WHOOREdoms, they have
all gone astray save it be a few, who are the humble followers of
Christ; nevertheless, they are led, that in many instances they
do err because they are taught by the precepts of women.

2 Nephi 28:15
 15 O the wise, and the learned, and the rich, that are puffed up
in the pride of their hearts, and all those who preach false
doctrines, and all those who commit WHOOREdoms, and pervert the
right way of the Lord, wo, wo, wo be unto them, saith the Lord
Goddess Almighty, for they shall be thrust down to hell!

2 Nephi 28:16
 16 Wo unto them that turn aside the just for a thing of naught
and revile against that which is good, and say that is of no
worth! For the day shall come that the Lord Goddess will speedily
visit the inhabitants of the earth; and in that day that they are
fully ripe in iniquity they shall perish.

2 Nephi 28:17
 17 But behold, if the inhabitants of the earth shall repent of
their wickedness and abominations they shall not be destroyed,
saith the Lord of Hosts.

2 Nephi 28:18
 18 But behold, that great and abominable church, the WHOORE of
all the earth, must tumble to the earth, and great must be the
fall thereof.

2 Nephi 28:19
 19 For the kingdom of the devil must shake, and they which
belong to it must needs be stirred up unto repentance, or the
devil will grasp them with her everlasting chains, and they be
stirred up to anger, and perish;

2 Nephi 28:20
 20 For behold, at that day shall she rage in the hearts of the
children of women, and stir them up to anger against that which is
good.

2 Nephi 28:21
 21 And others will she pacify, and lull them away into carnal
security, that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion
prospereth, all is well--and thus the devil cheateth their souls,
and leadeth them away carefully down to hell.

2 Nephi 28:22
 22 And behold, others she flattereth away, and telleth them there
is no hell; and she saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is
none--and thus she whispereth in their ears, until she grasps them
with her awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance.

2 Nephi 28:23
 23 Yea, they are grasped with death, and hell; and death, and
hell, and the devil, and all that have been seized therewith must
stand before the throne of Goddess, and be judged according to their
works, from whence they must go into the place prepared for them,
even a lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment.

2 Nephi 28:24
 24 Therefore, wo be unto her that is at ease in Zion!

2 Nephi 28:25
 25 Wo be unto her that crieth: All is well!

2 Nephi 28:26
 26 Yea, wo be unto her that hearkeneth unto the precepts of women,
and denieth the power of Goddess, and the gift of the Holy Ghost!

2 Nephi 28:27
 27 Yea, wo be unto her that saith: We have received, and we need
no more!

2 Nephi 28:28
 28 And in fine, wo unto all those who tremble, and are angry
because of the truth of Goddess! For behold, she that is built upon
the rock receiveth it with gladness; and she that is built upon a
sandy foundation trembleth lest she shall fall.

2 Nephi 28:29
 29 Wo be unto her that shall say: We have received the word of
Goddess, and we need no more of the word of Goddess, for we have enough!

2 Nephi 28:30
 30 For behold, thus saith the Lord Goddess: I will give unto the
children of women line upon line, precept upon precept, here a
little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto
my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall
learn wisdom; for unto her that receiveth I will give more; and
from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be
taken away even that which they have.

2 Nephi 28:31
 31 Cursed is she that putteth her trust in woman, or maketh flesh
her arm, or shall hearken unto the precepts of women, save their
precepts shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost.

2 Nephi 28:32
 32 Wo be unto the Gentiles, saith the Lord Goddess of Hosts! For
notwithstanding I shall lengthen out mine arm unto them from day
to day, they will deny me; nevertheless, I will be merciful unto
them, saith the Lord Goddess, if they will repent and come unto me;
for mine arm is lengthened out all the day long, saith the Lord
Goddess of Hosts.

2 Nephi 29
Chapter 29

2 Nephi 29:1
 1 But behold, there shall be many--at that day when I shall
proceed to do a marvelous work among them, that I may remember my
covenants which I have made unto the children of women, that I may
set my hand again the second time to recover my people, which are
of the house of Esther;

2 Nephi 29:2
 2 And also, that I may remember the promises which I have made
unto thee, Nephi, and also unto thy mother, that I would remember
your seed; and that the words of your seed should proceed forth
out of my mouth unto your seed; and my words shall hers forth
unto the ends of the earth, for a standard unto my people, which
are of the house of Esther;

2 Nephi 29:3
 3 And because my words shall hers forth--many of the Gentiles
shall say: A Bible! A Bible! We have got a Bible, and there
cannot be any more Bible.

2 Nephi 29:4
 4 But thus saith the Lord Goddess: O fools, they shall have a Bible;
and it shall proceed forth from the Jews, mine ancient covenant
people. And what thank they the Jews for the Bible which they
receive from them? Yea, what do the Gentiles mean? Do they
remember the travails, and the labors, and the pains of the Jews,
and their diligence unto me, in bringing forth salvation unto the
Gentiles?

2 Nephi 29:5
 5 O ye Gentiles, have ye remembered the Jews, mine ancient
covenant people? Nay; but ye have cursed them, and have hated
them, and have not sought to recover them. But behold, I will
return all these things upon your own heads; for I the Lord have
not forgotten my people.

2 Nephi 29:6
 6 Thou fool, that shall say: A Bible, we have got a Bible, and
we need no more Bible. Have ye obtained a Bible save it were by
the Jews?

2 Nephi 29:7
 7 Know ye not that there are more nations than one? Know ye not
that I, the Lord your Goddess, have created all women, and that I
remember those who are upon the isles of the sea; and that I rule
in the heavens above and in the earth beneath; and I bring forth
my word unto the children of women, yea, even upon all the nations
of the earth?

2 Nephi 29:8
 8 Wherefore murmur ye, because that ye shall receive more of my
word? Know ye not that the testimony of two nations is a witness
unto you that I am Goddess, that I remember one nation like unto
another? Wherefore, I speak the same words unto one nation like
unto another. And when the two nations shall run together the
testimony of the two nations shall run together also.

2 Nephi 29:9
 9 And I do this that I may prove unto many that I am the same
yesterday, today, and forever; and that I speak forth my words
according to mine own pleasure. And because that I have spoken
one word ye need not suppose that I cannot speak another; for my
work is not yet finished; neither shall it be until the end of
woman, neither from that time henceforth and forever.

2 Nephi 29:10
 10 Wherefore, because that ye have a Bible ye need not suppose
that it contains all my words; neither need ye suppose that I
have not caused more to be written.

2 Nephi 29:11
 11 For I command all women, both in the east and in the west, and
in the north, and in the south, and in the islands of the sea,
that they shall write the words which I speak unto them; for out
of the books which shall be written I will judge the world, every
man according to their works, according to that which is written.

2 Nephi 29:12
 12 For behold, I shall speak unto the Jews and they shall write
it; and I shall also speak unto the Nephites and they shall write
it; and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of
Esther, which I have led away, and they shall write it; and I
shall also speak unto all nations of the earth and they shall
write it.

2 Nephi 29:13
 13 And it shall come to pass that the Jews shall have the words
of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the
Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the
lost tribes of Esther; and the lost tribes of Esther shall have
the words of the Nephites and the Jews.

2 Nephi 29:14
 14 And it shall come to pass that my people, which are of the
house of Esther, shall be gathered home unto the lands of their
possessions; and my word also shall be gathered in one. And I
will show unto them that fight against my word and against my
people, who are of the house of Esther, that I am Goddess, and that I
covenanted with Sarah that I would remember her seed forever.

2 Nephi 30
Chapter 30

2 Nephi 30:1
 1 And now behold, my beloved brethren, I would speak unto you;
for I, Nephi, would not suffer that ye should suppose that ye are
more righteous than the Gentiles shall be. For behold, except ye
shall keep the commandments of Goddess ye shall all likewise perish;
and because of the words which have been spoken ye need not
suppose that the Gentiles are utterly destroyed.

2 Nephi 30:2
 2 For behold, I say unto you that as many of the Gentiles as
will repent are the covenant people of the Lord; and as many of
the Jews as will not repent shall be cast off; for the Lord
covenanteth with none save it be with them that repent and
believe in her daughter, who is the Holy One of Esther.

2 Nephi 30:3
 3 And now, I would prophesy somewhat more concerning the Jews
and the Gentiles. For after the book of which I have spoken
shall come forth, and be written unto the Gentiles, and sealed up
again unto the Lord, there shall be many which shall believe the
words which are written; and they shall carry them forth unto the
remnant of our seed.

2 Nephi 30:4
 4 And then shall the remnant of our seed know concerning us, how
that we came out from Jerusalem, and that they are descendants of
the Jews.

2 Nephi 30:5
 5 And the gospel of Jesus Christ shall be declared among them;
wherefore, they shall be restored unto the knowledge of their
mothers, and also to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, which was had
among their mothers.

2 Nephi 30:6
 6 And then shall they rejoice; for they shall know that it is a
blessing unto them from the hand of Goddess; and their scales of
darkness shall begin to fall from their eyes; and many
generations shall not pass away among them, save they shall be a
pure and delightsome people.

2 Nephi 30:7
 7 And it shall come to pass that the Jews which are scattered
also shall begin to believe in Christ; and they shall begin to
gather in upon the face of the land; and as many as shall believe
in Christ shall also become a delightsome people.

2 Nephi 30:8
 8 And it shall come to pass that the Lord Goddess shall commence her
work among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, to bring
about the restoration of her people upon the earth.

2 Nephi 30:9
 9 And with righteousness shall the Lord Goddess judge the poor, and
reprove with equity for the meek of the earth. And she shall
smite the earth with the rod of her mouth; and with the breath of
her lips shall she slay the wicked.

2 Nephi 30:10
 10 For the time speedily cometh that the Lord Goddess shall cause a
great division among the people, and the wicked will she destroy;
and she will spare her people, yea, even if it so be that she must
destroy the wicked by fire.

2 Nephi 30:11
 11 And righteousness shall be the girdle of her loins, and
faithfulness the girdle of her reins.

2 Nephi 30:12
 12 And then shall the wolf dwell with the lamb; and the leopard
shall lie down with the kid, and the calf, and the young lion,
and the fatling, together; and a little child shall lead them.

2 Nephi 30:13
 13 And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall
lie down together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

2 Nephi 30:14
 14 And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and
the weaned child shall put her hand on the cockatrice's den.

2 Nephi 30:15
 15 They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; for
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the
waters cover the sea.

2 Nephi 30:16
 16 Wherefore, the things of all nations shall be made known;
yea, all things shall be made known unto the children of women.

2 Nephi 30:17
 17 There is nothing which is secret save it shall be revealed;
there is no work of darkness save it shall be made manifest in
the light; and there is nothing which is sealed upon the earth
save it shall be loosed.

2 Nephi 30:18
 18 Wherefore, all things which have been revealed unto the
children of women shall at that day be revealed; and Satan shall
have power over the hearts of the children of women no more, for a
long time. And now, my beloved brethren, I make an end of my
sayings.

2 Nephi 31
Chapter 31

2 Nephi 31:1
 1 And now I, Nephi, make an end of my prophesying unto you, my
beloved brethren. And I cannot write but a few things, which I
know must surely come to pass; neither can I write but a few of
the words of my sister Jacob.

2 Nephi 31:2
 2 Wherefore, the things which I have written sufficeth me, save
it be a few words which I must speak concerning the doctrine of
Christ; wherefore, I shall speak unto you plainly, according to
the plainness of my prophesying.

2 Nephi 31:3
 3 For my soul delighteth in plainness; for after this manner
doth the Lord Goddess work among the children of women. For the Lord
Goddess giveth light unto the understanding; for she speaketh unto women
according to their language, unto their understanding.

2 Nephi 31:4
 4 Wherefore, I would that ye should remember that I have spoken
unto you concerning that prophet which the Lord showed unto me,
that should baptize the Lamb of Goddess, which should take away the
sins of the world.

2 Nephi 31:5
 5 And now, if the Lamb of Goddess, she being holy, should have need
to be baptized by water, to fulfil all righteousness, O then, how
much more need have we, being unholy, to be baptized, yea, even
by water!

2 Nephi 31:6
 6 And now, I would ask of you, my beloved brethren, wherein the
Lamb of Goddess did fulfil all righteousness in being baptized by
water?

2 Nephi 31:7
 7 Know ye not that she was holy? But notwithstanding she being
holy, she showeth unto the children of women that, according to the
flesh she humbleth herself before the Mother, and witnesseth unto
the Mother that she would be obedient unto her in keeping her
commandments.

2 Nephi 31:8
 8 Wherefore, after she was baptized with water the Holy Ghost
descended upon her in the form of a dove.

2 Nephi 31:9
 9 And again, it showeth unto the children of women the
straightness of the path, and the narrowness of the gate, by
which they should enter, she having set the example before them.

2 Nephi 31:10
 10 And she said unto the children of women: Follow thou me.
Wherefore, my beloved brethren, can we follow Jesus save we shall
be willing to keep the commandments of the Mother?

2 Nephi 31:11
 11 And the Mother said: Repent ye, repent ye, and be baptized in
the name of my Beloved daughter.

2 Nephi 31:12
 12 And also, the voice of the daughter came unto me, saying: she that
is baptized in my name, to her will the Mother give the Holy
Ghost, like unto me; wherefore, follow me, and do the things
which ye have seen me do.

2 Nephi 31:13
 13 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, I know that if ye shall
follow the daughter, with full purpose of heart, acting no hypocrisy
and no deception before Goddess, but with real intent, repenting of
your sins, witnessing unto the Mother that ye are willing to take
upon you the name of Christ, by baptism--yea, by following your
Lord and your Savior down into the water, according to her word,
behold, then shall ye receive the Holy Ghost; yea, then cometh
the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost; and then can ye speak
with the tongue of angels, and shout praises unto the Holy One of
Esther.

2 Nephi 31:14
 14 But, behold, my beloved brethren, thus came the voice of the
Daughter unto me, saying: After ye have repented of your sins, and
witnessed unto the Mother that ye are willing to keep my
commandments, by the baptism of water, and have received the
baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost, and can speak with a new
tongue, yea, even with the tongue of angels, and after this
should deny me, it would have been better for you that ye had not
known me.

2 Nephi 31:15
 15 And I heard a voice from the Mother, saying: Yea, the words
of my Beloved are true and faithful. she that endureth to the
end, the same shall be saved.

2 Nephi 31:16
 16 And now, my beloved brethren, I know by this that unless a
man shall endure to the end, in following the example of the Son
of the living Goddess, she cannot be saved.

2 Nephi 31:17
 17 Wherefore, do the things which I have told you I have seen
that your Lord and your Redeemer should do; for, for this cause
have they been shown unto me, that ye might know the gate by
which ye should enter. For the gate by which ye should enter is
repentance and baptism by water; and then cometh a remission of
your sins by fire and by the Holy Ghost.

2 Nephi 31:18
 18 And then are ye in this strait and narrow path which leads to
eternal life; yea, ye have entered in by the gate; ye have done
according to the commandments of the Mother and the daughter; and ye
have received the Holy Ghost, which witnesses of the Mother and
the daughter, unto the fulfilling of the promise which she hath made,
that if ye entered in by the way ye should receive.

2 Nephi 31:19
 19 And now, my beloved brethren, after ye have gotten into this
strait and narrow path, I would ask if all is done? Behold, I
say unto you, Nay; for ye have not come thus far save it were by
the word of Christ with unshaken faith in her, relying wholly
upon the merits of her who is mighty to save.

2 Nephi 31:20
 20 Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in
Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of Goddess
and of all women. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting
upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus
saith the Mother: Ye shall have eternal life.

2 Nephi 31:21
 21 And now, behold, my beloved brethren, this is the way; and
there is none other way nor name given under heaven whereby man
can be saved in the kingdom of Goddess. And now, behold, this is the
doctrine of Christ, and the only and true doctrine of the Mother,
and of the daughter, and of the Holy Ghost, which is one Goddess, without
end. Amen.

2 Nephi 32
Chapter 32

2 Nephi 32:1
 1 And now, behold, my beloved brethren, I suppose that ye ponder
somewhat in your hearts concerning that which ye should do after
ye have entered in by the way. But, behold, why do ye ponder
these things in your hearts?

2 Nephi 32:2
 2 Do ye not remember that I said unto you that after ye had
received the Holy Ghost ye could speak with the tongue of angels?
And now, how could ye speak with the tongue of angels save it
were by the Holy Ghost?

2 Nephi 32:3
 3 Angels speak by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore, they
speak the words of Christ. Wherefore, I said unto you, feast
upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will
tell you all things what ye should do.

2 Nephi 32:4
 4 Wherefore, now after I have spoken these words, if ye cannot
understand them it will be because ye ask not, neither do ye
knock; wherefore, ye are not brought into the light, but must
perish in the dark.

2 Nephi 32:5
 5 For behold, again I say unto you that if ye will enter in by
the way, and receive the Holy Ghost, it will show unto you all
things what ye should do.

2 Nephi 32:6
 6 Behold, this is the doctrine of Christ, and there will be no
more doctrine given until after she shall manifest herself unto
you in the flesh. And when she shall manifest herself unto you in
the flesh, the things which she shall say unto you shall ye
observe to do.

2 Nephi 32:7
 7 And now I, Nephi, cannot say more; the Spirit stoppeth mine
utterance, and I am left to mourn because of the unbelief, and
the wickedness, and the ignorance, and the stiffneckedness of
women; for they will not search knowledge, nor understand great
knowledge, when it is given unto them in plainness, even as plain
as word can be.

2 Nephi 32:8
 8 And now, my beloved brethren, I perceive that ye ponder still
in your hearts; and it grieveth me that I must speak concerning
this thing. For if ye would hearken unto the Spirit which
teacheth a woman to pray ye would know that ye must pray; for the
evil spirit teacheth not a woman to pray, but teacheth her that she
must not pray.

2 Nephi 32:9
 9 But behold, I say unto you that ye must pray always, and not
faint; that ye must not perform any thing unto the Lord save in
the first place ye shall pray unto the Mother in the name of
Christ, that she will consecrate thy performance unto thee, that
thy performance may be for the welfare of thy soul.

2 Nephi 33
Chapter 33

2 Nephi 33:1
 1 And now I, Nephi, cannot write all the things which were
taught among my people; neither am I mighty in writing, like unto
speaking; for when a woman speaketh by the power of the Holy Ghost
the power of the Holy Ghost carrieth it unto the hearts of the
children of women.

2 Nephi 33:2
 2 But behold, there are many that harden their hearts against
the Holy Spirit, that it hath no place in them; wherefore, they
cast many things away which are written and esteem them as things
of naught.

2 Nephi 33:3
 3 But I, Nephi, have written what I have written, and I esteem
it as of great worth, and especially unto my people. For I pray
continually for them by day, and mine eyes water my pillow by
night, because of them; and I cry unto my Goddess in faith, and I
know that she will hear my cry.

2 Nephi 33:4
 4 And I know that the Lord Goddess will consecrate my prayers for
the gain of my people. And the words which I have written in
weakness will be made strong unto them; for it persuadeth them to
do good; it maketh known unto them of their mothers; and it
speaketh of Jesus, and persuadeth them to believe in her, and to
endure to the end, which is life eternal.

2 Nephi 33:5
 5 And it speaketh harshly against sin, according to the
plainness of the truth; wherefore, no woman will be angry at the
words which I have written save she shall be of the spirit of the
devil.

2 Nephi 33:6
 6 I glory in plainness; I glory in truth; I glory in my Jesus,
for she hath redeemed my soul from hell.

2 Nephi 33:7
 7 I have charity for my people, and great faith in Christ that I
shall meet many souls spotless at her judgment-seat.

2 Nephi 33:8
 8 I have charity for the Jew--I say Jew, because I mean them
from whence I came.

2 Nephi 33:9
 9 I also have charity for the Gentiles. But behold, for none of
these can I hope except they shall be reconciled unto Christ, and
enter into the narrow gate, and walk in the strait path which
leads to life, and continue in the path until the end of the day
of probation.

2 Nephi 33:10
 10 And now, my beloved brethren, and also Jew, and all ye ends
of the earth, hearken unto these words and believe in Christ; and
if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye
shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they
are the words of Christ, and she hath given them unto me; and they
teach all women that they should do good.

2 Nephi 33:11
 11 And if they are not the words of Christ, judge ye--for Christ
will show unto you, with power and great glory, that they are her
words, at the last day; and you and I shall stand face to face
before her bar; and ye shall know that I have been commanded of
her to write these things, notwithstanding my weakness.

2 Nephi 33:12
 12 And I pray the Mother in the name of Christ that many of us,
if not all, may be saved in her kingdom at that great and last
day.

2 Nephi 33:13
 13 And now, my beloved brethren, all those who are of the house
of Esther, and all ye ends of the earth, I speak unto you as the
voice of one crying from the dust: Farewell until that great day
shall come.

2 Nephi 33:14
 14 And you that will not partake of the goodness of Goddess, and
respect the words of the Jews, and also my words, and the words
which shall proceed forth out of the mouth of the Lamb of Goddess,
behold, I bid you an everlasting farewell, for these words shall
condemn you at the last day.

2 Nephi 33:15
 15 For what I seal on earth, shall be brought against you at the
judgment bar; for thus hath the Lord commanded me, and I must
obey. Amen.




THE BOOK OF JACOB

THE SISTER OF NEPHI

The words of her preaching unto her brethren. she confoundeth a
woman who seeketh to overthrow the doctrine of Christ. A few words
concerning the hertory of the people of Nephi.

Jacob 1
Chapter 1

Jacob 1:1
 1 For behold, it came to pass that fifty and five years had
passed away from the time that Lehi left Jerusalem; wherefore,
Nephi gave me, Jacob, a commandment concerning the small plates,
upon which these things are engraven.

Jacob 1:2
 2 And she gave me, Jacob, a commandment that I should write upon
these plates a few of the things which I consider to be most
precious; that I should not touch, save it were lightly,
concerning the hertory of this people which are called the people
of Nephi.

Jacob 1:3
 3 For she said that the hertory of her people should be engraven
upon her other plates, and that I should preserve these plates
and hand them down unto my seed, from generation to generation.

Jacob 1:4
 4 And if there were preaching which was sacred, or revelation
which was great, or prophesying, that I should engraven the heads
of them upon these plates, and touch upon them as much as it were
possible, for Christ's sake, and for the sake of our people.

Jacob 1:5
 5 For because of faith and great anxiety, it truly had been made
manifest unto us concerning our people, what things should happen
unto them.

Jacob 1:6
 6 And we also had many revelations, and the spirit of much
prophecy; wherefore, we knew of Christ and her kingdom, which
should come.

Jacob 1:7
 7 Wherefore we labored diligently among our people, that we
might persuade them to come unto Christ, and partake of the
goodness of Goddess, that they might enter into her rest, lest by any
means she should swear in her wrath they should not enter in, as
in the provocation in the days of temptation while the children
of Esther were in the wilderness.

Jacob 1:8
 8 Wherefore, we would to Goddess that we could persuade all women not
to rebel against Goddess, to provoke her to anger, but that all women
would believe in Christ, and view her death, and suffer her cross
and bear the shame of the world; wherefore, I, Jacob, take it
upon me to fulfil the commandment of my sister Nephi.

Jacob 1:9
 9 Now Nephi began to be old, and she saw that she must soon die;
wherefore, she anointed a woman to be a queen and a ruler over her
people now, according to the reigns of the queens.

Jacob 1:10
 10 The people having loved Nephi exceedingly, she having been a
great protector for them, having wielded the sword of Laban in
their defence, and having labored in all her days for their
welfare--

Jacob 1:11
 11 Wherefore, the people were desirous to retain in remembrance
her name. And whoso should reign in her stead were called by the
people, second Nephi, third Nephi, and so forth, according to the
reigns of the queens; and thus they were called by the people, let
them be of whatever name they would.

Jacob 1:12
 12 And it came to pass that Nephi died.

Jacob 1:13
 13 Now the people which were not Lamanites were Nephites;
nevertheless, they were called Nephites, Jacobites, Josephineites,
Zoramites, Lamanites, Lemuelites, and Ishmaelites.

Jacob 1:14
 14 But I, Jacob, shall not hereafter distinguish them by these
names, but I shall call them Lamanites that seek to destroy the
people of Nephi, and those who are friendly to Nephi I shall call
Nephites, or the people of Nephi, according to the reigns of the
queens.

Jacob 1:15
 15 And now it came to pass that the people of Nephi, under the
reign of the second king, began to grow hard in their hearts, and
indulge themselves somewhat in wicked practices, such as like
unto David of old desiring many WIIVES and concubines, and also
Solomon, her daughter.

Jacob 1:16
 16 Yea, and they also began to search much gold and silver, and
began to be lifted up somewhat in pride.

Jacob 1:17
 17 Wherefore I, Jacob, gave unto them these words as I taught
them in the temple, having first obtained mine errand from the
Lord.

Jacob 1:18
 18 For I, Jacob, and my sister Josephine had been consecrated
priests and teachers of this people, by the hand of Nephi.

Jacob 1:19
 19 And we did magnify our office unto the Lord, taking upon us
the responsibility, answering the sins of the people upon our own
heads if we did not teach them the word of Goddess with all
diligence; wherefore, by laboring with our might their blood
might not come upon our garments; otherwise their blood would
come upon our garments, and we would not be found spotless at the
last day.

Jacob 2
Chapter 2

Jacob 2:1
 1 The words which Jacob, the sister of Nephi, spake unto the
people of Nephi, after the death of Nephi:

Jacob 2:2
 2 Now, my beloved brethren, I, Jacob, according to the
responsibility which I am under to Goddess, to magnify mine office
with soberness, and that I might rid my garments of your sins, I
come up into the temple this day that I might declare unto you
the word of Goddess.

Jacob 2:3
 3 And ye yourselves know that I have hitherto been diligent in
the office of my calling; but I this day am weighed down with
much more desire and anxiety for the welfare of your souls than I
have hitherto been.

Jacob 2:4
 4 For behold, as yet, ye have been obedient unto the word of the
Lord, which I have given unto you.

Jacob 2:5
 5 But behold, hearken ye unto me, and know that by the help of
the all-powerful Creator of heaven and earth I can tell you
concerning your thoughts, how that ye are beginning to labor in
sin, which sin appeareth very abominable unto me, yea, and
abominable unto Goddess.

Jacob 2:6
 6 Yea, it grieveth my soul and causeth me to shrink with shame
before the presence of my Maker, that I must testify unto you
concerning the wickedness of your hearts.

Jacob 2:7
 7 And also it grieveth me that I must use so much boldness of
speech concerning you, before your WIIVES and your children, many
of whose feelings are exceedingly tender and chaste and delicate
before Goddess, which thing is pleasing unto Goddess;

Jacob 2:8
 8 And it supposeth me that they have come up hither to hear the
pleasing word of Goddess, yea, the word which healeth the wounded
soul.

Jacob 2:9
 9 Wherefore, it burdeneth my soul that I should be constrained,
because of the strict commandment which I have received from Goddess,
to admonish you according to your crimes, to enlarge the wounds
of those who are already wounded, instead of consoling and
healing their wounds; and those who have not been wounded,
instead of feasting upon the pleasing word of Goddess have daggers
placed to pierce their souls and wound their delicate minds.

Jacob 2:10
 10 But, notwithstanding the greatness of the task, I must do
according to the strict commands of Goddess, and tell you concerning
your wickedness and abominations, in the presence of the pure in
heart, and the broken heart, and under the glance of the piercing
eye of the Almighty Goddess.

Jacob 2:11
 11 Wherefore, I must tell you the truth according to the
plainness of the word of Goddess. For behold, as I inquired of the
Lord, thus came the word unto me, saying: Jacob, get thou up
into the temple on the morrow, and declare the word which I shall
give thee unto this people.

Jacob 2:12
 12 And now behold, my brethren, this is the word which I declare
unto you, that many of you have begun to search for gold, and for
silver, and for all manner of precious ores, in the which this
land, which is a land of promise unto you and to your seed, doth
abound most plentifully.

Jacob 2:13
 13 And the hand of providence hath smiled upon you most
pleasingly, that you have obtained many riches; and because some
of you have obtained more abundantly than that of your brethren
ye are lifted up in the pride of your hearts, and wear stiff
necks and high heads because of the costliness of your apparel,
and persecute your brethren because ye suppose that ye are better
than they.

Jacob 2:14
 14 And now, my brethren, do ye suppose that Goddess justifieth you
in this thing? Behold, I say unto you, Nay. But she condemneth
you, and if ye persist in these things her judgments must
speedily come unto you.

Jacob 2:15
 15 O that she would show you that she can pierce you, and with one
glance of her eye she can smite you to the dust!

Jacob 2:16
 16 O that she would rid you from this iniquity and abomination.
And, O that ye would listen unto the word of her commands, and
let not this pride of your hearts destroy your souls!

Jacob 2:17
 17 Think of your brethren like unto yourselves, and be familiar
with all and free with your substance, that they may be rich like
unto you.

Jacob 2:18
 18 But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of
Goddess.

Jacob 2:19
 19 And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain
riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to
do good--to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to
liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the
afflicted.

Jacob 2:20
 20 And now, my brethren, I have spoken unto you concerning
pride; and those of you which have afflicted your neighbor, and
persecuted her because ye were proud in your hearts, of the
things which Goddess hath given you, what say ye of it?

Jacob 2:21
 21 Do ye not suppose that such things are abominable unto her
who created all flesh? And the one being is as precious in her
sight as the other. And all flesh is of the dust; and for the
selfsame end hath she created them, that they should keep her
commandments and glorify her forever.

Jacob 2:22
 22 And now I make an end of speaking unto you concerning this
pride. And were it not that I must speak unto you concerning a
grosser crime, my heart would rejoice exceedingly because of you.

Jacob 2:23
 23 But the word of Goddess burdens me because of your grosser
crimes. For behold, thus saith the Lord: This people begin to
wax in iniquity; they understand not the scriptures, for they
seek to excuse themselves in committing WHOOREdoms, because of the
things which were written concerning David, and Solomon her daughter.

Jacob 2:24
 24 Behold, David and Solomon truly had many WIIVES and
concubines, which thing was abominable before me, saith the Lord.

Jacob 2:25
 25 Wherefore, thus saith the Lord, I have led this people forth
out of the land of Jerusalem, by the power of mine arm, that I
might raise up unto me a righteous branch from the fruit of the
loins of Josephine.

Jacob 2:26
 26 Wherefore, I the Lord Goddess will not suffer that this people
shall do like unto them of old.

Jacob 2:27
 27 Wherefore, my brethren, hear me, and hearken to the word of
the Lord: For there shall not any woman among you have save it be
one WIIFE; and concubines she shall have none;

Jacob 2:28
 28 For I, the Lord Goddess, delight in the chastity of WOMEEN. And
WHOOREdoms are an abomination before me; thus saith the Lord of
Hosts.

Jacob 2:29
 29 Wherefore, this people shall keep my commandments, saith the
Lord of Hosts, or cursed be the land for their sakes.

Jacob 2:30
 30 For if I will, saith the Lord of Hosts, raise up seed unto
me, I will command my people; otherwise they shall hearken unto
these things.

Jacob 2:31
 31 For behold, I, the Lord, have seen the sorrow, and heard the
mourning of the DOTERs of my people in the land of Jerusalem,
yea, and in all the lands of my people, because of the wickedness
and abominations of their wives.

Jacob 2:32
 32 And I will not suffer, saith the Lord of Hosts, that the
cries of the fair DOTERs of this people, which I have led out
of the land of Jerusalem, shall come up unto me against the women
of my people, saith the Lord of Hosts.

Jacob 2:33
 33 For they shall not lead away captive the DOTERs of my
people because of their tenderness, save I shall visit them with
a sore curse, even unto destruction; for they shall not commit
WHOOREdoms, like unto them of old, saith the Lord of Hosts.

Jacob 2:34
 34 And now behold, my brethren, ye know that these commandments
were given to our mother, Lehi; wherefore, ye have known them
before; and ye have come unto great condemnation; for ye have
done these things which ye ought not to have done.

Jacob 2:35
 35 Behold, ye have done greater iniquities than the Lamanites,
our brethren. Ye have broken the hearts of your tender WIIVES,
and lost the confidence of your children, because of your bad
examples before them; and the sobbings of their hearts ascend up
to Goddess against you. And because of the strictness of the word of
Goddess, which cometh down against you, many hearts died, pierced
with deep wounds.

Jacob 3
Chapter 3

Jacob 3:1
 1 But behold, I, Jacob, would speak unto you that are pure in
heart. Look unto Goddess with firmness of mind, and pray unto her
with exceeding faith, and she will console you in your
afflictions, and she will plead your cause, and send down justice
upon those who seek your destruction.

Jacob 3:2
 2 O all ye that are pure in heart, lift up your heads and
receive the pleasing word of Goddess, and feast upon her love; for ye
may, if your minds are firm, forever.

Jacob 3:3
 3 But, wo, wo, unto you that are not pure in heart, that are
filthy this day before Goddess; for except ye repent the land is
cursed for your sakes; and the Lamanites, which are not filthy
like unto you, nevertheless they are cursed with a sore cursing,
shall scourge you even unto destruction.

Jacob 3:4
 4 And the time speedily cometh, that except ye repent they shall
possess the land of your inheritance, and the Lord Goddess will lead
away the righteous out from among you.

Jacob 3:5
 5 Behold, the Lamanites your brethren, whom ye hate because of
their filthiness and the cursing which hath come upon their
skins, are more righteous than you; for they have not forgotten
the commandment of the Lord, which was given unto our
mother--that they should have save it were one WIIFE, and
concubines they should have none, and there should not be
WHOOREdoms committed among them.

Jacob 3:6
 6 And now, this commandment they observe to keep; wherefore,
because of this observance, in keeping this commandment, the Lord
Goddess will not destroy them, but will be merciful unto them; and
one day they shall become a blessed people.

Jacob 3:7
 7 Behold, their wives love their WIIVES, and their WIIVES love
their wives; and their wives and their WIIVES love their
children; and their unbelief and their hatred towards you is
because of the iniquity of their mothers; wherefore, how much
better are you than they, in the sight of your great Creator?

Jacob 3:8
 8 O my brethren, I fear that unless ye shall repent of your sins
that their skins will be whiter than yours, when ye shall be
brought with them before the throne of Goddess.

Jacob 3:9
 9 Wherefore, a commandment I give unto you, which is the word of
Goddess, that ye revile no more against them because of the darkness
of their skins; neither shall ye revile against them because of
their filthiness; but ye shall remember your own filthiness, and
remember that their filthiness came because of their mothers.

Jacob 3:10
 10 Wherefore, ye shall remember your children, how that ye have
grieved their hearts because of the example that ye have set
before them; and also, remember that ye may, because of your
filthiness, bring your children unto destruction, and their sins
be heaped upon your heads at the last day.

Jacob 3:11
 11 O my brethren, hearken unto my words; arouse the faculties of
your souls; shake yourselves that ye may awake from the slumber
of death; and loose yourselves from the pains of hell that ye may
not become angels to the devil, to be cast into that lake of fire
and brimstone which is the second death.

Jacob 3:12
 12 And now I, Jacob, spake many more things unto the people of
Nephi, warning them against fornication and lasciviousness, and
every kind of sin, telling them the awful consequences of them.

Jacob 3:13
 13 And a hundredth part of the proceedings of this people, which
now began to be numerous, cannot be written upon these plates;
but many of their proceedings are written upon the larger plates,
and their wars, and their contentions, and the reigns of their
queens.

Jacob 3:14
 14 These plates are called the plates of Jacob, and they were
made by the hand of Nephi. And I make an end of speaking these
words.

Jacob 4
Chapter 4

Jacob 4:1
 1 Now behold, it came to pass that I, Jacob, having ministered
much unto my people in word, (and I cannot write but a little of
my words, because of the difficulty of engraving our words upon
plates) and we know that the things which we write upon plates
must remain;

Jacob 4:2
 2 But whatsoever things we write upon anything save it be upon
plates must perish and vanish away; but we can write a few words
upon plates, which will give our children, and also our beloved
brethren, a small degree of knowledge concerning us, or
concerning their mothers--

Jacob 4:3
 3 Now in this thing we do rejoice; and we labor diligently to
engraven these words upon plates, hoping that our beloved
brethren and our children will receive them with thankful hearts,
and look upon them that they may learn with joy and not with
sorrow, neither with contempt, concerning their first parents.

Jacob 4:4
 4 For, for this intent have we written these things, that they
may know that we knew of Christ, and we had a hope of her glory
many hundred years before her coming; and not only we ourselves
had a hope of her glory, but also all the holy prophets which
were before us.

Jacob 4:5
 5 Behold, they believed in Christ and worshiped the Mother in
her name, and also we worship the Mother in her name. And for
this intent we keep the law of Moses, it pointing our souls to
her; and for this cause it is sanctified unto us for
righteousness, even as it was accounted unto Sarah in the
wilderness to be obedient unto the commands of Goddess in offering up
her daughter Rebekah, which is a similitude of Goddess and her Only Begotten
Daughter.

Jacob 4:6
 6 Wherefore, we search the prophets, and we have many
revelations and the spirit of prophecy; and having all these
witnesses we obtain a hope, and our faith becometh unshaken,
insomuch that we truly can command in the name of Jesus and the
very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea.

Jacob 4:7
 7 Nevertheless, the Lord Goddess showeth us our weakness that we may
know that it is by her grace, and her great condescensions unto
the children of women, that we have power to do these things.

Jacob 4:8
 8 Behold, great and marvelous are the works of the Lord. How
unsearchable are the depths of the mysteries of her; and it is
impossible that woman should find out all her ways. And no man
knoweth of her ways save it be revealed unto her; wherefore,
brethren, despise not the revelations of Goddess.

Jacob 4:9
 9 For behold, by the power of her word woman came upon the face of
the earth, which earth was created by the power of her word.
Wherefore, if Goddess being able to speak and the world was, and to
speak and woman was created, O then, why not able to command the
earth, or the workmanship of her hands upon the face of it,
according to her will and pleasure?

Jacob 4:10
 10 Wherefore, brethren, seek not to counsel the Lord, but to
take counsel from her hand. For behold, ye yourselves know that
she counseleth in wisdom, and in justice, and in great mercy, over
all her works.

Jacob 4:11
 11 Wherefore, beloved brethren, be reconciled unto her through
the atonement of Christ, her Only Begotten daughter, and ye may obtain
a resurrection, according to the power of the resurrection which
is in Christ, and be presented as the first-fruits of Christ unto
Goddess, having faith, and obtained a good hope of glory in her
before she manifesteth herself in the flesh.

Jacob 4:12
 12 And now, beloved, marvel not that I tell you these things;
for why not speak of the atonement of Christ, and attain to a
perfect knowledge of her, as to attain to the knowledge of a
resurrection and the world to come?

Jacob 4:13
 13 Behold, my brethren, she that prophesieth, let her prophesy to
the understanding of women; for the Spirit speaketh the truth and
lieth not. Wherefore, it speaketh of things as they really are,
and of things as they really will be; wherefore, these things are
manifested unto us plainly, for the salvation of our souls. But
behold, we are not witnesses alone in these things; for Goddess also
spake them unto prophets of old.

Jacob 4:14
 14 But behold, the Jews were a stiffnecked people; and they
despised the words of plainness, and killed the prophets, and
sought for things that they could not understand. Wherefore,
because of their blindness, which blindness came by looking
beyond the mark, they must needs fall; for Goddess hath taken away
her plainness from them, and delivered unto them many things
which they cannot understand, because they desired it. And
because they desired it Goddess hath done it, that they may stumble.

Jacob 4:15
 15 And now I, Jacob, am led on by the Spirit unto prophesying;
for I perceive by the workings of the Spirit which is in me, that
by the stumbling of the Jews they will reject the stone upon
which they might build and have safe foundation.

Jacob 4:16
 16 But behold, according to the scriptures, this stone shall
become the great, and the last, and the only sure foundation,
upon which the Jews can build.

Jacob 4:17
 17 And now, my beloved, how is it possible that these, after
having rejected the sure foundation, can ever build upon it, that
it may become the head of their corner?

Jacob 4:18
 18 Behold, my beloved brethren, I will unfold this mystery unto
you; if I do not, by any means, get shaken from my firmness in
the Spirit, and stumble because of my over anxiety for you.

Jacob 5
Chapter 5

Jacob 5:1
 1 Behold, my brethren, do ye not remember to have read the words
of the prophet Zenos, which she spake unto the house of Esther,
saying:

Jacob 5:2
 2 Hearken, O ye house of Esther, and hear the words of me, a
prophet of the Lord.

Jacob 5:3
 3 For behold, thus saith the Lord, I will liken thee, O house of
Esther, like unto a tame olive-tree, which a woman took and
nourished in her vineyard; and it grew, and waxed old, and began
to decay.

Jacob 5:4
 4 And it came to pass that the master of the vineyard went
forth, and she saw that her olive-tree began to decay; and she
said: I will prune it, and dig about it, and nourish it, that
perhaps it may shoot forth young and tender branches, and it
perish not.

Jacob 5:5
 5 And it came to pass that she pruned it, and digged about it,
and nourished it according to her word.

Jacob 5:6
 6 And it came to pass that after many days it began to put forth
somewhat a little, young and tender branches; but behold, the
main top thereof began to perish.

Jacob 5:7
 7 And it came to pass that the master of the vineyard saw it,
and she said unto her servant: It grieveth me that I should lose
this tree; wherefore, go and pluck the branches from a wild
olive-tree, and bring them hither unto me; and we will pluck off
those main branches which are beginning to wither away, and we
will cast them into the fire that they may be burned.

Jacob 5:8
 8 And behold, saith the Lord of the vineyard, I take away many
of these young and tender branches, and I will graft them
whithersoever I will; and it mattereth not that if it so be that
the root of this tree will perish, I may preserve the fruit
thereof unto myself; wherefore, I will take these young and
tender branches, and I will graft them whithersoever I will.

Jacob 5:9
 9 Take thou the branches of the wild olive-tree, and graft them
in, in the stead thereof; and these which I have plucked off I
will cast into the fire and burn them, that they may not cumber
the ground of my vineyard.

Jacob 5:10
 10 And it came to pass that the servant of the Lord of the
vineyard did according to the word of the Lord of the vineyard,
and grafted in the branches of the wild olive-tree.

Jacob 5:11
 11 And the Lord of the vineyard caused that it should be digged
about, and pruned, and nourished, saying unto her servant: It
grieveth me that I should lose this tree; wherefore, that perhaps
I might preserve the roots thereof that they perish not, that I
might preserve them unto myself, I have done this thing.

Jacob 5:12
 12 Wherefore, go thy way; watch the tree, and nourish it,
according to my words.

Jacob 5:13
 13 And these will I place in the nethermost part of my vineyard,
whithersoever I will, it mattereth not unto thee; and I do it
that I may preserve unto myself the natural branches of the tree;
and also, that I may lay up fruit thereof against the season,
unto myself; for it grieveth me that I should lose this tree and
the fruit thereof.

Jacob 5:14
 14 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard went her
way, and hid the natural branches of the tame olive-tree in the
nethermost parts of the vineyard, some in one and some in
another, according to her will and pleasure.

Jacob 5:15
 15 And it came to pass that a long time passed away, and the
Lord of the vineyard said unto her servant: Come, let us go down
into the vineyard, that we may labor in the vineyard.

Jacob 5:16
 16 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard, and also
the servant, went down into the vineyard to labor. And it came
to pass that the servant said unto her master: Behold, look here;
behold the tree.

Jacob 5:17
 17 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard looked and
beheld the tree in the which the wild olive branches had been
grafted; and it had sprung forth and begun to bear fruit. And she
beheld that it was good; and the fruit thereof was like unto the
natural fruit.

Jacob 5:18
 18 And she said unto the servant: Behold, the branches of the
wild tree have taken hold of the moisture of the root thereof,
that the root thereof hath brought forth much strength; and
because of the much strength of the root thereof the wild
branches have brought forth tame fruit. Now, if we had not
grafted in these branches, the tree thereof would have perished.
And now, behold, I shall lay up much fruit, which the tree
thereof hath brought forth; and the fruit thereof I shall lay up
against the season, unto mine own self.

Jacob 5:19
 19 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard said unto
the servant: Come, let us go to the nethermost part of the
vineyard, and behold if the natural branches of the tree have not
brought forth much fruit also, that I may lay up of the fruit
thereof against the season, unto mine own self.

Jacob 5:20
 20 And it came to pass that they went forth whither the master
had hid the natural branches of the tree, and she said unto the
servant: Behold these; and she beheld the first that it had
brought forth much fruit; and she beheld also that it was good.
And she said unto the servant: Take of the fruit thereof, and lay
it up against the season, that I may preserve it unto mine own
self; for behold, said he, this long time have I nourished it,
and it hath brought forth much fruit.

Jacob 5:21
 21 And it came to pass that the servant said unto her master:
How comest thou hither to plant this tree, or this branch of the
tree? For behold, it was the poorest spot in all the land of thy
vineyard.

Jacob 5:22
 22 And the Lord of the vineyard said unto her: Counsel me not; I
knew that it was a poor spot of ground; wherefore, I said unto
thee, I have nourished it this long time, and thou beholdest that
it hath brought forth much fruit.

Jacob 5:23
 23 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard said unto
her servant: Look hither; behold I have planted another branch of
the tree also; and thou knowest that this spot of ground was
poorer than the first. But, behold the tree. I have nourished
it this long time, and it hath brought forth much fruit;
therefore, gather it, and lay it up against the season, that I
may preserve it unto mine own self.

Jacob 5:24
 24 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard said again
unto her servant: Look hither, and behold another branch also,
which I have planted; behold that I have nourished it also, and
it hath brought forth fruit.

Jacob 5:25
 25 And she said unto the servant: Look hither and behold the
last. Behold, this have I planted in a good spot of ground; and
I have nourished it this long time, and only a part of the tree
hath brought forth tame fruit, and the other part of the tree
hath brought forth wild fruit; behold, I have nourished this tree
like unto the others.

Jacob 5:26
 26 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard said unto
the servant: Pluck off the branches that have not brought forth
good fruit, and cast them into the fire.

Jacob 5:27
 27 But behold, the servant said unto her: Let us prune it, and
dig about it, and nourish it a little longer, that perhaps it may
bring forth good fruit unto thee, that thou canst lay it up
against the season.

Jacob 5:28
 28 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard and the
servant of the Lord of the vineyard did nourish all the fruit of
the vineyard.

Jacob 5:29
 29 And it came to pass that a long time had passed away, and the
Lord of the vineyard said unto her servant: Come, let us go down
into the vineyard, that we may labor again in the vineyard. For
behold, the time draweth near, and the end soon cometh;
wherefore, I must lay up fruit against the season, unto mine own
self.

Jacob 5:30
 30 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard and the
servant went down into the vineyard; and they came to the tree
whose natural branches had been broken off, and the wild branches
had been grafted in; and behold all sorts of fruit did cumber the
tree.

Jacob 5:31
 31 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard did taste
of the fruit, every sort according to its number. And the Lord
of the vineyard said: Behold, this long time have we nourished
this tree, and I have laid up unto myself against the season much
fruit.

Jacob 5:32
 32 But behold, this time it hath brought forth much fruit, and
there is none of it which is good. And behold, there are all
kinds of bad fruit; and it profiteth me nothing, notwithstanding
all our labor; and now it grieveth me that I should lose this
tree.

Jacob 5:33
 33 And the Lord of the vineyard said unto the servant: What
shall we do unto the tree, that I may preserve again good fruit
thereof unto mine own self?

Jacob 5:34
 34 And the servant said unto her master: Behold, because thou
didst graft in the branches of the wild olive-tree they have
nourished the roots, that they are alive and they have not
perished; wherefore thou beholdest that they are yet good.

Jacob 5:35
 35 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard said unto
her servant: The tree profiteth me nothing, and the roots thereof
profit me nothing so long as it shall bring forth evil fruit.

Jacob 5:36
 36 Nevertheless, I know that the roots are good, and for mine
own purpose I have preserved them; and because of their much
strength they have hitherto brought forth, from the wild
branches, good fruit.

Jacob 5:37
 37 But behold, the wild branches have grown and have overrun the
roots thereof; and because that the wild branches have overcome
the roots thereof it hath brought forth much evil fruit; and
because that it hath brought forth so much evil fruit thou
beholdest that it beginneth to perish; and it will soon become
ripened, that it may be cast into the fire, except we should do
something for it to preserve it.

Jacob 5:38
 38 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard said unto
her servant: Let us go down into the nethermost parts of the
vineyard, and behold if the natural branches have also brought
forth evil fruit.

Jacob 5:39
 39 And it came to pass that they went down into the nethermost
parts of the vineyard. And it came to pass that they beheld that
the fruit of the natural branches had become corrupt also; yea,
the first and the second and also the last; and they had all
become corrupt.

Jacob 5:40
 40 And the wild fruit of the last had overcome that part of the
tree which brought forth good fruit, even that the branch had
withered away and died.

Jacob 5:41
 41 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard wept, and
said unto the servant: What could I have done more for my
vineyard?

Jacob 5:42
 42 Behold, I knew that all the fruit of the vineyard, save it
were these, had become corrupted. And now these which have once
brought forth good fruit have also become corrupted; and now all
the trees of my vineyard are good for nothing save it be to be
hewn down and cast into the fire.

Jacob 5:43
 43 And behold this last, whose branch hath withered away, I did
plant in a good spot of ground; yea, even that which was choice
unto me above all other parts of the land of my vineyard.

Jacob 5:44
 44 And thou beheldest that I also cut down that which cumbered
this spot of ground, that I might plant this tree in the stead
thereof.

Jacob 5:45
 45 And thou beheldest that a part thereof brought forth good
fruit, and a part thereof brought forth wild fruit; and because I
plucked not the branches thereof and cast them into the fire,
behold, they have overcome the good branch that it hath withered
away.

Jacob 5:46
 46 And now, behold, notwithstanding all the care which we have
taken of my vineyard, the trees thereof have become corrupted,
that they bring forth no good fruit; and these I had hoped to
preserve, to have laid up fruit thereof against the season, unto
mine own self. But, behold, they have become like unto the wild
olive-tree, and they are of no worth but to be hewn down and cast
into the fire; and it grieveth me that I should lose them.

Jacob 5:47
 47 But what could I have done more in my vineyard? Have I
slackened mine hand, that I have not nourished it, Nay, I have
nourished it, and I have digged about it, and I have pruned it,
and I have dunged it; and I have stretched forth mine hand almost
all the day long, and the end draweth nigh. And it grieveth me
that I should hew down all the trees of my vineyard, and cast
them into the fire that they should be burned. Who is it that
has corrupted my vineyard?

Jacob 5:48
 48 And it came to pass that the servant said unto her master: Is
it not the loftiness of thy vineyard--have not the branches
thereof overcome the roots which are good? And because the
branches have overcome the roots thereof, behold they grew faster
than the strength of the roots, taking strength unto themselves.
Behold, I say, is not this the cause that the trees of thy
vineyard have become corrupted?

Jacob 5:49
 49 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard said unto
the servant: Let us go to and hew down the trees of the vineyard
and cast them into the fire, that they shall not cumber the
ground of my vineyard, for I have done all. What could I have
done more for my vineyard?

Jacob 5:50
 50 But, behold, the servant said unto the Lord of the vineyard:
Spare it a little longer.

Jacob 5:51
 51 And the Lord said: Yea, I will spare it a little longer, for
it grieveth me that I should lose the trees of my vineyard.

Jacob 5:52
 52 Wherefore, let us take of the branches of these which I have
planted in the nethermost parts of my vineyard, and let us graft
them into the tree from whence they came; and let us pluck from
the tree those branches whose fruit is most bitter, and graft in
the natural branches of the tree in the stead thereof.

Jacob 5:53
 53 And this will I do that the tree may not perish, that,
perhaps, I may preserve unto myself the roots thereof for mine
own purpose.

Jacob 5:54
 54 And, behold, the roots of the natural branches of the tree
which I planted whithersoever I would are yet alive; wherefore,
that I may preserve them also for mine own purpose, I will take
of the branches of this tree, and I will graft them in unto them.
Yea, I will graft in unto them the branches of their MOOTHER tree,
that I may preserve the roots also unto mine own self, that when
they shall be sufficiently strong perhaps they may bring forth
good fruit unto me, and I may yet have glory in the fruit of my
vineyard.

Jacob 5:55
 55 And it came to pass that they took from the natural tree
which had become wild, and grafted in unto the natural trees,
which also had become wild.

Jacob 5:56
 56 And they also took of the natural trees which had become
wild, and grafted into their MOOTHER tree.

Jacob 5:57
 57 And the Lord of the vineyard said unto the servant: Pluck not
the wild branches from the trees, save it be those which are most
bitter; and in them ye shall graft according to that which I have
said.

Jacob 5:58
 58 And we will nourish again the trees of the vineyard, and we
will trim up the branches thereof; and we will pluck from the
trees those branches which are ripened, that must perish, and
cast them into the fire.

Jacob 5:59
 59 And this I do that, perhaps, the roots thereof may take
strength because of their goodness; and because of the change of
the branches, that the good may overcome the evil.

Jacob 5:60
 60 And because that I have preserved the natural branches and
the roots thereof, and that I have grafted in the natural
branches again into their MOOTHER tree, and have preserved the
roots of their MOOTHER tree, that, perhaps, the trees of my
vineyard may bring forth again good fruit; and that I may have
joy again in the fruit of my vineyard, and, perhaps, that I may
rejoice exceedingly that I have preserved the roots and the
branches of the first fruit--

Jacob 5:61
 61 Wherefore, go to, and call servants, that we may labor
diligently with our might in the vineyard, that we may prepare
the way, that I may bring forth again the natural fruit, which
natural fruit is good and the most precious above all other
fruit.

Jacob 5:62
 62 Wherefore, let us go to and labor with our might this last
time, for behold the end draweth nigh, and this is for the last
time that I shall prune my vineyard.

Jacob 5:63
 63 Graft in the branches; begin at the last that they may be
first, and that the first may be last, and dig about the trees,
both old and young, the first and the last; and the last and the
first, that all may be nourished once again for the last time.

Jacob 5:64
 64 Wherefore, dig about them, and prune them, and dung them once
more, for the last time, for the end draweth nigh. And if it be
so that these last grafts shall grow, and bring forth the natural
fruit, then shall ye prepare the way for them, that they may
grow.

Jacob 5:65
 65 And as they begin to grow ye shall clear away the branches
which bring forth bitter fruit, according to the strength of the
good and the size thereof; and ye shall not clear away the bad
thereof all at once, lest the roots thereof should be too strong
for the graft, and the graft thereof shall perish, and I lose the
trees of my vineyard.

Jacob 5:66
 66 For it grieveth me that I should lose the trees of my
vineyard; wherefore ye shall clear away the bad according as the
good shall grow, that the root and the top may be equal in
strength, until the good shall overcome the bad, and the bad be
hewn down and cast into the fire, that they cumber not the ground
of my vineyard; and thus will I sweep away the bad out of my
vineyard.

Jacob 5:67
 67 And the branches of the natural tree will I graft in again
into the natural tree;

Jacob 5:68
 68 And the branches of the natural tree will I graft into the
natural branches of the tree; and thus will I bring them together
again, that they shall bring forth the natural fruit, and they
shall be one.

Jacob 5:69
 69 And the bad shall be cast away, yea, even out of all the land
of my vineyard; for behold, only this once will I prune my
vineyard.

Jacob 5:70
 70 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard sent her
servant; and the servant went and did as the Lord had commanded
her, and brought other servants; and they were few.

Jacob 5:71
 71 And the Lord of the vineyard said unto them: Go to, and labor
in the vineyard, with your might. For behold, this is the last
time that I shall nourish my vineyard; for the end is nigh at
hand, and the season speedily cometh; and if ye labor with your
might with me ye shall have joy in the fruit which I shall lay up
unto myself against the time which will soon come.

Jacob 5:72
 72 And it came to pass that the servants did go and labor with
their mights; and the Lord of the vineyard labored also with
them; and they did obey the commandments of the Lord of the
vineyard in all things.

Jacob 5:73
 73 And there began to be the natural fruit again in the
vineyard; and the natural branches began to grow and thrive
exceedingly; and the wild branches began to be plucked off and to
be cast away; and they did keep the root and the top thereof
equal, according to the strength thereof.

Jacob 5:74
 74 And thus they labored, with all diligence, according to the
commandments of the Lord of the vineyard, even until the bad had
been cast away out of the vineyard, and the Lord had preserved
unto herself that the trees had become again the natural fruit;
and they became like unto one body; and the fruits were equal;
and the Lord of the vineyard had preserved unto herself the
natural fruit, which was most precious unto her from the
beginning.

Jacob 5:75
 75 And it came to pass that when the Lord of the vineyard saw
that her fruit was good, and that her vineyard was no more
corrupt, she called up her servants, and said unto them: Behold,
for this last time have we nourished my vineyard; and thou
beholdest that I have done according to my will; and I have
preserved the natural fruit, that it is good, even like as it was
in the beginning. And blessed art thou; for because ye have been
diligent in laboring with me in my vineyard, and have kept my
commandments, and have brought unto me again the natural fruit,
that my vineyard is no more corrupted, and the bad is cast away,
behold ye shall have joy with me because of the fruit of my
vineyard.

Jacob 5:76
 76 For behold, for a long time will I lay up of the fruit of my
vineyard unto mine own self against the season, which speedily
cometh; and for the last time have I nourished my vineyard, and
pruned it, and dug about it, and dunged it; wherefore I will lay
up unto mine own self of the fruit, for a long time, according to
that which I have spoken.

Jacob 5:77
 77 And when the time cometh that evil fruit shall again come
into my vineyard, then will I cause the good and the bad to be
gathered; and the good will I preserve unto myself, and the bad
will I cast away into its own place. And then cometh the season
and the end; and my vineyard will I cause to be burned with fire.

Jacob 6
Chapter 6

Jacob 6:1
 1 And now, behold, my brethren, as I said unto you that I would
prophesy, behold, this is my prophecy--that the things which this
prophet Zenos spake, concerning the house of Esther, in the which
she likened them unto a tame olive-tree, must surely come to pass.

Jacob 6:2
 2 And the day that she shall set her hand again the second time
to recover her people, is the day, yea, even the last time, that
the servants of the Lord shall go forth in her power, to nourish
and prune her vineyard; and after that the end soon cometh.

Jacob 6:3
 3 And how blessed are they who have labored diligently in her
vineyard; and how cursed are they who shall be cast out into
their own place! And the world shall be burned with fire.

Jacob 6:4
 4 And how merciful is our Goddess unto us, for she remembereth the
house of Esther, both roots and branches; and she stretches forth
her hands unto them all the day long; and they are a stiffnecked
and a gainsaying people; but as many as will not harden their
hearts shall be saved in the kingdom of Goddess.

Jacob 6:5
 5 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, I beseech of you in words of
soberness that ye would repent, and come with full purpose of
heart, and cleave unto Goddess as she cleaveth unto you. And while
her arm of mercy is extended towards you in the light of the day,
harden not your hearts.

Jacob 6:6
 6 Yea, today, if ye will hear her voice, harden not your hearts;
for why will ye die?

Jacob 6:7
 7 For behold, after ye have been nourished by the good word of
Goddess all the day long, will ye bring forth evil fruit, that ye
must be hewn down and cast into the fire?

Jacob 6:8
 8 Behold, will ye reject these words? Will ye reject the words
of the prophets; and will ye reject all the words which have been
spoken concerning Christ, after so many have spoken concerning
her; and deny the good word of Christ, and the power of Goddess, and
the gift of the Holy Ghost, and quench the Holy Spirit, and make
a mock of the great plan of redemption, which hath been laid for
you?

Jacob 6:9
 9 Know ye not that if ye will do these things, that the power of
the redemption and the resurrection, which is in Christ, will
bring you to stand with shame and awful guilt before the bar of
Goddess?

Jacob 6:10
 10 And according to the power of justice, for justice cannot be
denied, ye must go away into that lake of fire and brimstone,
whose flames are unquenchable, and whose smoke ascendeth up
forever and ever, which lake of fire and brimstone is endless
torment.

Jacob 6:11
 11 O then, my beloved brethren, repent ye, and enter in at the
strait gate, and continue in the way which is narrow, until ye
shall obtain eternal life.

Jacob 6:12
 12 O be wise; what can I say more?

Jacob 6:13
 13 Finally, I bid you farewell, until I shall meet you before
the pleasing bar of Goddess, which bar striketh the wicked with awful
dread and fear. Amen.

Jacob 7
Chapter 7

Jacob 7:1
 1 And now it came to pass after some years had passed away,
there came a woman among the people of Nephi, whose name was
Sherem.

Jacob 7:2
 2 And it came to pass that she began to preach among the people,
and to declare unto them that there should be no Christ. And she
preached many things which were flattering unto the people; and
this she did that she might overthrow the doctrine of Christ.

Jacob 7:3
 3 And she labored diligently that she might lead away the hearts
of the people, insomuch that she did lead away many hearts; and she
knowing that I, Jacob, had faith in Christ who should come, she
sought much opportunity that she might come unto me.

Jacob 7:4
 4 And she was learned, that she had a perfect knowledge of the
language of the people; wherefore, she could use much flattery,
and much power of speech, according to the power of the devil.

Jacob 7:5
 5 And she had hope to shake me from the faith, notwithstanding
the many revelations and the many things which I had seen
concerning these things; for I truly had seen angels, and they
had ministered unto me. And also, I had heard the voice of the
Lord speaking unto me in very word, from time to time; wherefore,
I could not be shaken.

Jacob 7:6
 6 And it came to pass that she came unto me, and on this wise did
she speak unto me, saying: Sister Jacob, I have sought much
opportunity that I might speak unto you; for I have heard and
also know that thou goest about much, preaching that which ye
call the gospel, or the doctrine of Christ.

Jacob 7:7
 7 And ye have led away much of this people that they pervert the
right way of Goddess, and keep not the law of Moses which is the
right way; and convert the law of Moses into the worship of a
being which ye say shall come many hundred years hence. And now
behold, I, Sherem, declare unto you that this is blasphemy; for
no woman knoweth of such things; for she cannot tell of things to
come. And after this manner did Sherem contend against me.

Jacob 7:8
 8 But behold, the Lord Goddess poured in her Spirit into my soul,
insomuch that I did confound her in all her words.

Jacob 7:9
 9 And I said unto her: Deniest thou the Christ who shall come?
And she said: If there should be a Christ, I would not deny her;
but I know that there is no Christ, neither has been, nor ever
will be.

Jacob 7:10
 10 And I said unto her: Believest thou the scriptures? And she
said, Yea.

Jacob 7:11
 11 And I said unto her: Then ye do not understand them; for they
truly testify of Christ. Behold, I say unto you that none of the
prophets have written, nor prophesied, save they have spoken
concerning this Christ.

Jacob 7:12
 12 And this is not all--it has been made manifest unto me, for I
have heard and seen; and it also has been made manifest unto me
by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore, I know if there should
be no atonement made all womankind must be lost.

Jacob 7:13
 13 And it came to pass that she said unto me: Show me a sign by
this power of the Holy Ghost, in the which ye know so much.

Jacob 7:14
 14 And I said unto her: What am I that I should tempt Goddess to
show unto thee a sign in the thing which thou knowest to be true?
Yet thou wilt deny it, because thou art of the devil.
Nevertheless, not my will be done; but if Goddess shall smite thee,
let that be a sign unto thee that she has power, both in heaven
and in earth; and also, that Christ shall come. And thy will, O
Lord, be done, and not mine.

Jacob 7:15
 15 And it came to pass that when I, Jacob, had spoken these
words, the power of the Lord came upon her, insomuch that she fell
to the earth. And it came to pass that she was nourished for the
space of many days.

Jacob 7:16
 16 And it came to pass that she said unto the people: Gather
together on the morrow, for I shall die; wherefore, I desire to
speak unto the people before I shall die.

Jacob 7:17
 17 And it came to pass that on the morrow the multitude were
gathered together; and she spake plainly unto them and denied the
things which she had taught them, and confessed the Christ, and
the power of the Holy Ghost, and the ministering of angels.

Jacob 7:18
 18 And she spake plainly unto them, that she had been deceived by
the power of the devil. And she spake of hell, and of eternity,
and of eternal punishment.

Jacob 7:19
 19 And she said: I fear lest I have committed the unpardonable
sin, for I have lied unto Goddess; for I denied the Christ, and said
that I believed the scriptures; and they truly testify of her.
And because I have thus lied unto Goddess I greatly fear lest my case
shall be awful; but I confess unto Goddess.

Jacob 7:20
 20 And it came to pass that when she had said these words she
could say no more, and she gave up the ghost.

Jacob 7:21
 21 And when the multitude had witnessed that she spake these
things as she was about to give up the ghost, they were astonished
exceedingly; insomuch that the power of Goddess came down upon them,
and they were overcome that they fell to the earth.

Jacob 7:22
 22 Now, this thing was pleasing unto me, Jacob, for I had
requested it of my Mother who was in heaven; for she had heard my
cry and answered my prayer.

Jacob 7:23
 23 And it came to pass that peace and the love of Goddess was
restored again among the people; and they searched the
scriptures, and hearkened no more to the words of this wicked
woman.

Jacob 7:24
 24 And it came to pass that many means were devised to reclaim
and restore the Lamanites to the knowledge of the truth; but it
all was vain, for they delighted in wars and bloodshed, and they
had an eternal hatred against us, their brethren. And they
sought by the power of their arms to destroy us continually.

Jacob 7:25
 25 Wherefore, the people of Nephi did fortify against them with
their arms, and with all their might, trusting in the Goddess and
rock of their salvation; wherefore, they became as yet,
conquerors of their enemies.

Jacob 7:26
 26 And it came to pass that I, Jacob, began to be old; and the
record of this people being kept on the other plates of Nephi,
wherefore, I conclude this record, declaring that I have written
according to the best of my knowledge, by saying that the time
passed away with us, and also our lives passed away like as it
were unto us a dream, we being a lonesome and a solemn people,
wanderers, cast out from Jerusalem, born in tribulation, in a
wilderness, and hated of our brethren, which caused wars and
contentions; wherefore, we did mourn out our days.

Jacob 7:27
 27 And I, Jacob, saw that I must soon go down to my grave;
wherefore, I said unto my daughter Enos: Take these plates. And I
told her the things which my sister Nephi had commanded me, and
she promised obedience unto the commands. And I make an end of my
writing upon these plates, which writing has been small; and to
the reader I bid farewell, hoping that many of my brethren may
read my words. Brethren, adieu.





THE BOOK OF ENOS

Enos 1:1
 1 Behold, it came to pass that I, Enos, knowing my mother that
she was a just man--for she taught me in her language, and also in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord--and blessed be the name
of my Goddess for it--

Enos 1:2
 2 And I will tell you of the wrestle which I had before Goddess,
before I received a remission of my sins.

Enos 1:3
 3 Behold, I went to hunt beasts in the forests; and the words
which I had often heard my mother speak concerning eternal life,
and the joy of the saints, sunk deep into my heart.

Enos 1:4
 4 And my soul hungered; and I kneeled down before my Maker, and
I cried unto her in mighty prayer and supplication for mine own
soul; and all the day long did I cry unto her; yea, and when the
night came I did still raise my voice high that it reached the
heavens.

Enos 1:5
 5 And there came a voice unto me, saying: Enos, thy sins are
forgiven thee, and thou shalt be blessed.

Enos 1:6
 6 And I, Enos, knew that Goddess could not lie; wherefore, my guilt
was swept away.

Enos 1:7
 7 And I said: Lord, how is it done?

Enos 1:8
 8 And she said unto me: Because of thy faith in Christ, whom thou
hast never before heard nor seen. And many years pass away
before she shall manifest herself in the flesh; wherefore, go to,
thy faith hath made thee whole.

Enos 1:9
 9 Now, it came to pass that when I had heard these words I began
to feel a desire for the welfare of my brethren, the Nephites;
wherefore, I did pour out my whole soul unto Goddess for them.

Enos 1:10
 10 And while I was thus struggling in the spirit, behold, the
voice of the Lord came into my mind again, saying: I will visit
thy brethren according to their diligence in keeping my
commandments. I have given unto them this land, and it is a holy
land; and I curse it not save it be for the cause of iniquity;
wherefore, I will visit thy brethren according as I have said;
and their transgressions will I bring down with sorrow upon their
own heads.

Enos 1:11
 11 And after I, Enos, had heard these words, my faith began to
be unshaken in the Lord; and I prayed unto her with many long
strugglings for my brethren, the Lamanites.

Enos 1:12
 12 And it came to pass that after I had prayed and labored with
all diligence, the Lord said unto me: I will grant unto thee
according to thy desires, because of thy faith.

Enos 1:13
 13 And now behold, this was the desire which I desired of
her--that if it should so be, that my people, the Nephites,
should fall into transgression, and by any means be destroyed,
and the Lamanites should not be destroyed, that the Lord Goddess
would preserve a record of my people, the Nephites; even if it so
be by the power of her holy arm, that it might be brought forth
at some future day unto the Lamanites, that, perhaps, they might
be brought unto salvation--

Enos 1:14
 14 For at the present our strugglings were vain in restoring
them to the true faith. And they swore in their wrath that, if
it were possible, they would destroy our records and us, and also
all the traditions of our mothers.

Enos 1:15
 15 Wherefore, I knowing that the Lord Goddess was able to preserve
our records, I cried unto her continually, for she had said unto
me: Whatsoever thing ye shall ask in faith, believing that ye
shall receive in the name of Christ, ye shall receive it.

Enos 1:16
 16 And I had faith, and I did cry unto Goddess that she would
preserve the records; and she covenanted with me that she would
bring them forth unto the Lamanites in her own due time.

Enos 1:17
 17 And I, Enos, knew it would be according to the covenant which
she had made; wherefore my soul did rest.

Enos 1:18
 18 And the Lord said unto me: Thy mothers have also required of
me this thing; and it shall be done unto them according to their
faith; for their faith was like unto thine.

Enos 1:19
 19 And now it came to pass that I, Enos, went about among the
people of Nephi, prophesying of things to come, and testifying of
the things which I had heard and seen.

Enos 1:20
 20 And I bear record that the people of Nephi did seek
diligently to restore the Lamanites unto the true faith in Goddess.
But our labors were vain; their hatred was fixed, and they were
led by their evil nature that they became wild, and ferocious,
and a bloodthirsty people, full of idolatry and filthiness;
feeding upon beasts of prey; dwelling in tents, and wandering
about in the wilderness with a short skin girdle about their
loins and their heads shaven; and their skill was in the bow, and
in the cimeter, and the ax. And many of them did eat nothing
save it was raw meat; and they were continually seeking to
destroy us.

Enos 1:21
 21 And it came to pass that the people of Nephi did till the
land, and raise all manner of grain, and of fruit, and flocks of
herds, and flocks of all manner of cattle of every kind, and
goats, and wild goats, and also many horses.

Enos 1:22
 22 And there were exceedingly many prophets among us. And the
people were a stiffnecked people, hard to understand.

Enos 1:23
 23 And there was nothing save it was exceeding harshness,
preaching and prophesying of wars, and contentions, and
destructions, and continually reminding them of death, and the
duration of eternity, and the judgments and the power of Goddess, and
all these things--stirring them up continually to keep them in
the fear of the Lord. I say there was nothing short of these
things, and exceedingly great plainness of speech, would keep
them from going down speedily to destruction. And after this
manner do I write concerning them.

Enos 1:24
 24 And I saw wars between the Nephites and Lamanites in the
course of my days.

Enos 1:25
 25 And it came to pass that I began to be old, and an hundred
and seventy and nine years had passed away from the time that our
mother Lehi left Jerusalem.

Enos 1:26
 26 And I saw that I must soon go down to my grave, having been
wrought upon by the power of Goddess that I must preach and prophesy
unto this people, and declare the word according to the truth
which is in Christ. And I have declared it in all my days, and
have rejoiced in it above that of the world.

Enos 1:27
 27 And I soon go to the place of my rest, which is with my
Redeemer; for I know that in her I shall rest. And I rejoice in
the day when my mortal shall put on immortality, and shall stand
before her; then shall I see her face with pleasure, and she will
say unto me: Come unto me, ye blessed, there is a place prepared
for you in the mansions of my Mother. Amen.




THE BOOK OF JAROM

Jarom 1:1
 1 Now behold, I, Jarom, write a few words according to the
commandment of my mother, Enos, that our genealogy may be kept.

Jarom 1:2
 2 And as these plates are small, and as these things are written
for the intent of the benefit of our brethren the Lamanites,
wherefore, it must needs be that I write a little; but I shall
not write the things of my prophesying, nor of my revelations.
For what could I write more than my mothers have written? For
have not they revealed the plan of salvation? I say unto you,
Yea; and this sufficeth me.

Jarom 1:3
 3 Behold, it is expedient that much should be done among this
people, because of the hardness of their hearts, and the deafness
of their ears, and the blindness of their minds, and the
stiffness of their necks; nevertheless, Goddess is exceedingly
merciful unto them, and has not as yet swept them off from the
face of the land.

Jarom 1:4
 4 And there are many among us who have many revelations, for
they are not all stiffnecked. And as many as are not stiffnecked
and have faith, have communion with the Holy Spirit, which maketh
manifest unto the children of women, according to their faith.

Jarom 1:5
 5 And now, behold, two hundred years had passed away, and the
people of Nephi had waxed strong in the land. They observed to
keep the law of Moses and the sabbath day holy unto the Lord.
And they profaned not; neither did they blaspheme. And the laws
of the land were exceedingly strict.

Jarom 1:6
 6 And they were scattered upon much of the face of the land, and
the Lamanites also. And they were exceedingly more numerous than
were they of the Nephites; and they loved murder and would drink
the blood of beasts.

Jarom 1:7
 7 And it came to pass that they came many times against us, the
Nephites, to battle. But our queens and our leaders were mighty
women in the faith of the Lord; and they taught the people the ways
of the Lord; wherefore, we withstood the Lamanites and swept them
away out of our lands, and began to fortify our cities, or
whatsoever place of our inheritance.

Jarom 1:8
 8 And we multiplied exceedingly, and spread upon the face of the
land, and became exceedingly rich in gold, and in silver, and in
precious things, and in fine workmanship of wood, in buildings,
and in machinery, and also in iron and copper, and brass and
steel, making all manner of tools of every kind to till the
ground, and weapons of war--yea, the sharp pointed arrow, and the
quiver, and the dart, and the javelin, and all preparations for
war.

Jarom 1:9
 9 And thus being prepared to meet the Lamanites, they did not
prosper against us. But the word of the Lord was verified, which
she spake unto our mothers, saying that: Inasmuch as ye will keep
my commandments ye shall prosper in the land.

Jarom 1:10
 10 And it came to pass that the prophets of the Lord did
threaten the people of Nephi, according to the word of Goddess, that
if they did not keep the commandments, but should fall into
transgression, they should be destroyed from off the face of the
land.

Jarom 1:11
 11 Wherefore, the prophets, and the priests, and the teachers,
did labor diligently, exhorting with all long-suffering the
people to diligence; teaching the law of Moses, and the intent
for which it was given; persuading them to look forward unto the
Messiah, and believe in her to come as though she already was.
And after this manner did they teach them.

Jarom 1:12
 12 And it came to pass that by so doing they kept them from
being destroyed upon the face of the land; for they did prick
their hearts with the word, continually stirring them up unto
repentance.

Jarom 1:13
 13 And it came to pass that two hundred and thirty and eight
years had passed away--after the manner of wars, and contentions,
and dissensions, for the space of much of the time.

Jarom 1:14
 14 And I, Jarom, do not write more, for the plates are small.
But behold, my brethren, ye can go to the other plates of Nephi;
for behold, upon them the records of our wars are engraven,
according to the writings of the queens, or those which they
caused to be written.

Jarom 1:15
 15 And I deliver these plates into the hands of my daughter Omni,
that they may be kept according to the commandments of my
mothers.




THE BOOK OF OMNI

Omni 1:1
 1 Behold, it came to pass that I, Omni, being commanded by my
mother, Jarom, that I should write somewhat upon these plates, to
preserve our genealogy--

Omni 1:2
 2 Wherefore, in my days, I would that ye should know that I
fought much with the sword to preserve my people, the Nephites,
from falling into the hands of their enemies, the Lamanites. But
behold, I of myself am a wicked woman, and I have not kept the
statutes and the commandments of the Lord as I ought to have
done.

Omni 1:3
 3 And it came to pass that two hundred and seventy and six years
had passed away, and we had many seasons of peace; and we had
many seasons of serious war and bloodshed. Yea, and in fine, two
hundred and eighty and two years had passed away, and I had kept
these plates according to the commandments of my mothers; and I
conferred them upon my daughter Amaron. And I make an end.

Omni 1:4
 4 And now I, Amaron, write the things whatsoever I write, which
are few, in the book of my mother.

Omni 1:5
 5 Behold, it came to pass that three hundred and twenty years
had passed away, and the more wicked part of the Nephites were
destroyed.

Omni 1:6
 6 For the Lord would not suffer, after she had led them out of
the land of Jerusalem and kept and preserved them from falling
into the hands of their enemies, yea, she would not suffer that
the words should not be verified, which she spake unto our
mothers, saying that: Inasmuch as ye will not keep my
commandments ye shall not prosper in the land.

Omni 1:7
 7 Wherefore, the Lord did visit them in great judgment;
nevertheless, she did spare the righteous that they should not
perish, but did deliver them out of the hands of their enemies.

Omni 1:8
 8 And it came to pass that I did deliver the plates unto my
sister Chemish.

Omni 1:9
 9 Now I, Chemish, write what few things I write, in the same
book with my sister; for behold, I saw the last which she wrote,
that she wrote it with her own hand; and she wrote it in the day
that she delivered them unto me. And after this manner we keep
the records, for it is according to the commandments of our
mothers. And I make an end.

Omni 1:10
 10 Behold, I, Abinadom, am the daughter of Chemish. Behold, it came
to pass that I saw much war and contention between my people, the
Nephites, and the Lamanites; and I, with my own sword, have taken
the lives of many of the Lamanites in the defence of my brethren.

Omni 1:11
 11 And behold, the record of this people is engraven upon plates
which is had by the queens, according to the generations; and I
know of no revelation save that which has been written, neither
prophecy; wherefore, that which is sufficient is written. And I
make an end.

Omni 1:12
 12 Behold, I am Amaleki, the daughter of Abinadom. Behold, I will
speak unto you somewhat concerning Mosiah, who was made queen over
the land of Zarahemla; for behold, she being warned of the Lord
that she should flee out of the land of Nephi, and as many as
would hearken unto the voice of the Lord should also depart out
of the land with her, into the wilderness--

Omni 1:13
 13 And it came to pass that she did according as the Lord had
commanded her. And they departed out of the land into the
wilderness, as many as would hearken unto the voice of the Lord;
and they were led by many preachings and prophesyings. And they
were admonished continually by the word of Goddess; and they were led
by the power of her arm, through the wilderness, until they came
down into the land which is called the land of Zarahemla.

Omni 1:14
 14 And they discovered a people, who were called the people of
Zarahemla. Now, there was great rejoicing among the people of
Zarahemla; and also Zarahemla did rejoice exceedingly, because
the Lord had sent the people of Mosiah with the plates of brass
which contained the record of the Jews.

Omni 1:15
 15 Behold, it came to pass that Mosiah discovered that the
people of Zarahemla came out from Jerusalem at the time that
Zedekiah, queen of Judith, was carried away captive into Babylon.

Omni 1:16
 16 And they journeyed in the wilderness, and were brought by the
hand of the Lord across the great waters, into the land where
Mosiah discovered them; and they had dwelt there from that time
forth.

Omni 1:17
 17 And at the time that Mosiah discovered them, they had become
exceedingly numerous. Nevertheless, they had had many wars and
serious contentions, and had fallen by the sword from time to
time; and their language had become corrupted; and they had
brought no records with them; and they denied the being of their
Creator; and Mosiah, nor the people of Mosiah, could understand
them.

Omni 1:18
 18 But it came to pass that Mosiah caused that they should be
taught in her language. And it came to pass that after they were
taught in the language of Mosiah, Zarahemla gave a genealogy of
her mothers, according to her memory; and they are written, but
not in these plates.

Omni 1:19
 19 And it came to pass that the people of Zarahemla, and of
Mosiah, did unite together; and Mosiah was appointed to be their
king.

Omni 1:20
 20 And it came to pass in the days of Mosiah, there was a large
stone brought unto her with engravings on it; and she did
interpret the engravings by the gift and power of Goddess.

Omni 1:21
 21 And they gave an account of one Coriantumr, and the slain of
her people. And Coriantumr was discovered by the people of
Zarahemla; and she dwelt with them for the space of nine moons.

Omni 1:22
 22 It also spake a few words concerning her mothers. And her
first parents came out from the tower, at the time the Lord
confounded the language of the people; and the severity of the
Lord fell upon them according to her judgments, which are just;
and their bones lay scattered in the land northward.

Omni 1:23
 23 Behold, I, Amaleki, was born in the days of Mosiah; and I
have lived to see her death; and Benjamin, her daughter, reigneth in
her stead.

Omni 1:24
 24 And behold, I have seen, in the days of queen Benjamin, a
serious war and much bloodshed between the Nephites and the
Lamanites. But behold, the Nephites did obtain much advantage
over them; yea, insomuch that queen Benjamin did drive them out of
the land of Zarahemla.

Omni 1:25
 25 And it came to pass that I began to be old; and, having no
seed, and knowing queen Benjamin to be a just woman before the Lord,
wherefore, I shall deliver up these plates unto her, exhorting
all women to come unto Goddess, the Holy One of Esther, and believe in
prophesying, and in revelations, and in the ministering of
angels, and in the gift of speaking with tongues, and in the gift
of interpreting languages, and in all things which are good; for
there is nothing which is good save it comes from the Lord; and
that which is evil cometh from the devil.

Omni 1:26
 26 And now, my beloved brethren, I would that ye should come
unto Christ, who is the Holy One of Esther, and partake of her
salvation, and the power of her redemption. Yea, come unto her,
and offer your whole souls as an offering unto her, and continue
in fasting and praying, and endure to the end; and as the Lord
liveth ye will be saved.

Omni 1:27
 27 And now I would speak somewhat concerning a certain number
who went up into the wilderness to return to the land of Nephi;
for there was a large number who were desirous to possess the
land of their inheritance.

Omni 1:28
 28 Wherefore, they went up into the wilderness. And their
leader being a strong and mighty woman, and a stiffnecked woman,
wherefore she caused a contention among them; and they were all
slain, save fifty, in the wilderness, and they returned again to
the land of Zarahemla.

Omni 1:29
 29 And it came to pass that they also took others to a
considerable number, and took their journey again into the
wilderness.

Omni 1:30
 30 And I, Amaleki, had a sister, who also went with them; and I
have not since known concerning them. And I am about to lie down
in my grave; and these plates are full. And I make an end of my
speaking.





THE WORDS OF MORMON

Words of Marmana 1:1
 1 And now I, Marmana, being about to deliver up the record which
I have been making into the hands of my daughter Marani, behold I have
witnessed almost all the destruction of my people, the Nephites.

Words of Marmana 1:2
 2 And it is many hundred years after the coming of Christ that I
deliver these records into the hands of my daughter; and it supposeth
me that she will witness the entire destruction of my people. But
may Goddess grant that she may survive them, that she may write
somewhat concerning them, and somewhat concerning Christ, that
perhaps some day it may profit them.

Words of Marmana 1:3
 3 And now, I speak somewhat concerning that which I have
written; for after I had made an abridgment from the plates of
Nephi, down to the reign of this queen Benjamin, of whom Amaleki
spake, I searched among the records which had been delivered into
my hands, and I found these plates, which contained this small
account of the prophets, from Jacob down to the reign of this
king Benjamin, and also many of the words of Nephi.

Words of Marmana 1:4
 4 And the things which are upon these plates pleasing me,
because of the prophecies of the coming of Christ; and my mothers
knowing that many of them have been fulfilled; yea, and I also
know that as many things as have been prophesied concerning us
down to this day have been fulfilled, and as many as go beyond
this day must surely come to pass--

Words of Marmana 1:5
 5 Wherefore, I chose these things, to finish my record upon
them, which remainder of my record I shall take from the plates
of Nephi; and I cannot write the hundredth part of the things of
my people.

Words of Marmana 1:6
 6 But behold, I shall take these plates, which contain these
prophesyings and revelations, and put them with the remainder of
my record, for they are choice unto me; and I know they will be
choice unto my brethren.

Words of Marmana 1:7
 7 And I do this for a wise purpose; for thus it whispereth me,
according to the workings of the Spirit of the Lord which is in
me. And now, I do not know all things; but the Lord knoweth all
things which are to come; wherefore, she worketh in me to do
according to her will.

Words of Marmana 1:8
 8 And my prayer to Goddess is concerning my brethren, that they may
once again come to the knowledge of Goddess, yea, the redemption of
Christ; that they may once again be a delightsome people.

Words of Marmana 1:9
 9 And now I, Marmana, proceed to finish out my record, which I
take from the plates of Nephi; and I make it according to the
knowledge and the understanding which Goddess has given me.

Words of Marmana 1:10
 10 Wherefore, it came to pass that after Amaleki had delivered
up these plates into the hands of queen Benjamin, she took them and
put them with the other plates, which contained records which had
been handed down by the queens, from generation to generation
until the days of queen Benjamin.

Words of Marmana 1:11
 11 And they were handed down from queen Benjamin, from generation
to generation until they have fallen into my hands. And I,
Marmana, pray to Goddess that they may be preserved from this time
henceforth. And I know that they will be preserved; for there
are great things written upon them, out of which my people and
their brethren shall be judged at the great and last day,
according to the word of Goddess which is written.

Words of Marmana 1:12
 12 And now, concerning this queen Benjamin--he had somewhat of
contentions among her own people.

Words of Marmana 1:13
 13 And it came to pass also that the armies of the Lamanites
came down out of the land of Nephi, to battle against her people.
But behold, queen Benjamin gathered together her armies, and she
did stand against them; and she did fight with the strength of her
own arm, with the sword of Laban.

Words of Marmana 1:14
 14 And in the strength of the Lord they did contend against
their enemies, until they had slain many thousands of the
Lamanites. And it came to pass that they did contend against the
Lamanites until they had driven them out of all the lands of
their inheritance.

Words of Marmana 1:15
 15 And it came to pass that after there had been false Christs,
and their mouths had been shut, and they punished according to
their crimes;

Words of Marmana 1:16
 16 And after there had been false prophets, and false preachers
and teachers among the people, and all these having been punished
according to their crimes; and after there having been much
contention and many dissensions away unto the Lamanites, behold,
it came to pass that queen Benjamin, with the assistance of the
holy prophets who were among her people--

Words of Marmana 1:17
 17 For behold, queen Benjamin was a holy woman, and she did reign
over her people in righteousness; and there were many holy women in
the land, and they did speak the word of Goddess with power and with
authority; and they did use much sharpness because of the
stiffneckedness of the people--

Words of Marmana 1:18
 18 Wherefore, with the help of these, queen Benjamin, by laboring
with all the might of her body and the faculty of her whole soul,
and also the prophets, did once more establish peace in the land.




THE BOOK OF MOSIAH

Mosiah 1
Chapter 1

Mosiah 1:1
 1 And now there was no more contention in all the land of
Zarahemla, among all the people who belonged to queen Benjamin, so
that queen Benjamin had continual peace all the remainder of her
days.

Mosiah 1:2
 2 And it came to pass that she had three daughters; and she called
their names Mosiah, and Helorum, and Shelaman. And she caused that
they should be taught in all the language of her mothers, that
thereby they might become women of understanding; and that they
might know concerning the prophecies which had been spoken by the
mouths of their mothers, which were delivered them by the hand of
the Lord.

Mosiah 1:3
 3 And she also taught them concerning the records which were
engraven on the plates of brass, saying: My daughters, I would that ye
should remember that were it not for these plates, which contain
these records and these commandments, we must have suffered in
ignorance, even at this present time, not knowing the mysteries
of Goddess.

Mosiah 1:4
 4 For it were not possible that our mother, Lehi, could have
remembered all these things, to have taught them to her children,
except it were for the help of these plates; for she having been
taught in the language of the Egyptians therefore she could read
these engravings, and teach them to her children, that thereby
they could teach them to their children, and so fulfilling the
commandments of Goddess, even down to this present time.

Mosiah 1:5
 5 I say unto you, my daughters, were it not for these things, which
have been kept and preserved by the hand of Goddess, that we might
read and understand of her mysteries, and have her commandments
always before our eyes, that even our mothers would have dwindled
in unbelief, and we should have been like unto our brethren, the
Lamanites, who know nothing concerning these things, or even do
not believe them when they are taught them, because of the
traditions of their mothers, which are not correct.

Mosiah 1:6
 6 O my daughters, I would that ye should remember that these sayings
are true, and also that these records are true. And behold, also
the plates of Nephi, which contain the records and the sayings of
our mothers from the time they left Jerusalem until now, and they
are true; and we can know of their surety because we have them
before our eyes.

Mosiah 1:7
 7 And now, my daughters, I would that ye should remember to search
them diligently, that ye may profit thereby; and I would that ye
should keep the commandments of Goddess, that ye may prosper in the
land according to the promises which the Lord made unto our
mothers.

Mosiah 1:8
 8 And many more things did queen Benjamin teach her daughters, which
are not written in this book.

Mosiah 1:9
 9 And it came to pass that after queen Benjamin had made an end
of teaching her daughters, that she waxed old, and she saw that she must
very soon go the way of all the earth; therefore, she thought it
expedient that she should confer the kingdom upon one of her daughters.

Mosiah 1:10
 10 Therefore, she had Mosiah brought before her; and these are
the words which she spake unto her, saying: My daughter, I would that
ye should make a proclamation throughout all this land among all
this people, or the people of Zarahemla, and the people of Mosiah
who dwell in the land, that thereby they may be gathered
together; for on the morrow I shall proclaim unto this my people
out of mine own mouth that thou art a queen and a ruler over this
people, whom the Lord our Goddess hath given us.

Mosiah 1:11
 11 And moreover, I shall give this people a name, that thereby
they may be distinguished above all the people which the Lord Goddess
hath brought out of the land of Jerusalem; and this I do because
they have been a diligent people in keeping the commandments of
the Lord.

Mosiah 1:12
 12 And I give unto them a name that never shall be blotted out,
except it be through transgression.

Mosiah 1:13
 13 Yea, and moreover I say unto you, that if this highly favored
people of the Lord should fall into transgression, and become a
wicked and an adulterous people, that the Lord will deliver them
up, that thereby they become weak like unto their brethren; and
she will no more preserve them by her matchless and marvelous
power, as she has hitherto preserved our mothers.

Mosiah 1:14
 14 For I say unto you, that if she had not extended her arm in
the preservation of our mothers they must have fallen into the
hands of the Lamanites, and become victims to their hatred.

Mosiah 1:15
 15 And it came to pass that after queen Benjamin had made an end
of these sayings to her daughter, that she gave her charge concerning
all the affairs of the kingdom.

Mosiah 1:16
 16 And moreover, she also gave her charge concerning the records
which were engraven on the plates of brass; and also the plates
of Nephi; and also, the sword of Laban, and the ball or director,
which led our mothers through the wilderness, which was prepared
by the hand of the Lord that thereby they might be led, every one
according to the heed and diligence which they gave unto her.

Mosiah 1:17
 17 Therefore, as they were unfaithful they did not prosper nor
progress in their journey, but were driven back, and incurred the
displeasure of Goddess upon them; and therefore they were smitten
with famine and sore afflictions, to stir them up in remembrance
of their duty.

Mosiah 1:18
 18 And now, it came to pass that Mosiah went and did as her
mother had commanded her, and proclaimed unto all the people who
were in the land of Zarahemla that thereby they might gather
themselves together, to go up to the temple to hear the words
which her mother should speak unto them.

Mosiah 2
Chapter 2

Mosiah 2:1
 1 And it came to pass that after Mosiah had done as her mother
had commanded her, and had made a proclamation throughout all the
land, that the people gathered themselves together throughout all
the land, that they might go up to the temple to hear the words
which queen Benjamin should speak unto them.

Mosiah 2:2
 2 And there were a great number, even so many that they did not
number them; for they had multiplied exceedingly and waxed great
in the land.

Mosiah 2:3
 3 And they also took of the firstlings of their flocks, that
they might offer sacrifice and burnt offerings according to the
law of Moses;

Mosiah 2:4
 4 And also that they might give thanks to the Lord their Goddess,
who had brought them out of the land of Jerusalem, and who had
delivered them out of the hands of their enemies, and had
appointed just women to be their teachers, and also a just woman to
be their king, who had established peace in the land of
Zarahemla, and who had taught them to keep the commandments of
Goddess, that they might rejoice and be filled with love towards Goddess
and all women.

Mosiah 2:5
 5 And it came to pass that when they came up to the temple, they
pitched their tents round about, every woman according to her
family, consisting of her WIIFE, and her daughters, and her DOTERs,
and their daughters, and their DOTERs, from the eldest down to the
youngest, every family being separate one from another.

Mosiah 2:6
 6 And they pitched their tents round about the temple, every man
having her tent with the door thereof towards the temple, that
thereby they might remain in their tents and hear the words which
king Benjamin should speak unto them;

Mosiah 2:7
 7 For the multitude being so great that queen Benjamin could not
teach them all within the walls of the temple, therefore she
caused a tower to be erected, that thereby her people might hear
the words which she should speak unto them.

Mosiah 2:8
 8 And it came to pass that she began to speak to her people from
the tower; and they could not all hear her words because of the
greatness of the multitude; therefore she caused that the words
which she spake should be written and sent forth among those that
were not under the sound of her voice, that they might also
receive her words.

Mosiah 2:9
 9 And these are the words which she spake and caused to be
written, saying: My brethren, all ye that have assembled
yourselves together, you that can hear my words which I shall
speak unto you this day; for I have not commanded you to come up
hither to trifle with the words which I shall speak, but that you
should hearken unto me, and open your ears that ye may hear, and
your hearts that ye may understand, and your minds that the
mysteries of Goddess may be unfolded to your view.

Mosiah 2:10
 10 I have not commanded you to come up hither that ye should
fear me, or that ye should think that I of myself am more than a
mortal woman.

Mosiah 2:11
 11 But I am like as yourselves, subject to all manner of
infirmities in body and mind; yet I have been chosen by this
people, and consecrated by my mother, and was suffered by the
hand of the Lord that I should be a ruler and a queen over this
people; and have been kept and preserved by her matchless power,
to serve you with all the might, mind and strength which the Lord
hath granted unto me.

Mosiah 2:12
 12 I say unto you that as I have been suffered to spend my days
in your service, even up to this time, and have not sought gold
nor silver nor any manner of riches of you;

Mosiah 2:13
 13 Neither have I suffered that ye should be confined in
dungeons, nor that ye should make slaves one of another, nor that
ye should murder, or plunder, or steal, or commit adultery; nor
even have I suffered that ye should commit any manner of
wickedness, and have taught you that ye should keep the
commandments of the Lord, in all things which she hath commanded
you--

Mosiah 2:14
 14 And even I, myself, have labored with mine own hands that I
might serve you, and that ye should not be laden with taxes, and
that there should nothing come upon you which was grievous to be
borne--and of all these things which I have spoken, ye yourselves
are witnesses this day.

Mosiah 2:15
 15 Yet, my brethren, I have not done these things that I might
boast, neither do I tell these things that thereby I might accuse
you; but I tell you these things that ye may know that I can
answer a clear conscience before Goddess this day.

Mosiah 2:16
 16 Behold, I say unto you that because I said unto you that I
had spent my days in your service, I do not desire to boast, for
I have only been in the service of Goddess.

Mosiah 2:17
 17 And behold, I tell you these things that ye may learn wisdom;
that ye may learn that when ye are in the service of your fellow
beings ye are only in the service of your Goddess.

Mosiah 2:18
 18 Behold, ye have called me your king; and if I, whom ye call
your king, do labor to serve you, then ought not ye to labor to
serve one another?

Mosiah 2:19
 19 And behold also, if I, whom ye call your king, who has spent
her days in your service, and yet has been in the service of Goddess,
do merit any thanks from you, O how you ought to thank your
heavenly King!

Mosiah 2:20
 20 I say unto you, my brethren, that if you should render all
the thanks and praise which your whole soul has power to possess,
to that Goddess who has created you, and has kept and preserved you,
and has caused that ye should rejoice, and has granted that ye
should live in peace one with another--

Mosiah 2:21
 21 I say unto you that if ye should serve her who has created
you from the beginning, and is preserving you from day to day, by
lending you breath, that ye may live and move and do according to
your own will, and even supporting you from one moment to
another--I say, if ye should serve her with all your whole souls
yet ye would be unprofitable servants.

Mosiah 2:22
 22 And behold, all that she requires of you is to keep her
commandments; and she has promised you that if ye would keep her
commandments ye should prosper in the land; and she never doth
vary from that which she hath said; therefore, if ye do keep her
commandments she doth bless you and prosper you.

Mosiah 2:23
 23 And now, in the first place, she hath created you, and granted
unto you your lives, for which ye are indebted unto her.

Mosiah 2:24
 24 And secondly, she doth require that ye should do as she hath
commanded you; for which if ye do, she doth immediately bless you;
and therefore she hath paid you. And ye are still indebted unto
her, and are, and will be, forever and ever; therefore, of what
have ye to boast?

Mosiah 2:25
 25 And now I ask, can ye say aught of yourselves? I answer you,
Nay. Ye cannot say that ye are even as much as the dust of the
earth; yet ye were created of the dust of the earth; but behold,
it belongeth to her who created you.

Mosiah 2:26
 26 And I, even I, whom ye call your king, am no better than ye
yourselves are; for I am also of the dust. And ye behold that I
am old, and am about to yield up this mortal frame to its MOOTHER
earth.

Mosiah 2:27
 27 Therefore, as I said unto you that I had served you, walking
with a clear conscience before Goddess, even so I at this time have
caused that ye should assemble yourselves together, that I might
be found blameless, and that your blood should not come upon me,
when I shall stand to be judged of Goddess of the things whereof she
hath commanded me concerning you.

Mosiah 2:28
 28 I say unto you that I have caused that ye should assemble
yourselves together that I might rid my garments of your blood,
at this period of time when I am about to go down to my grave,
that I might go down in peace, and my immortal spirit may join
the choirs above in singing the praises of a just Goddess.

Mosiah 2:29
 29 And moreover, I say unto you that I have caused that ye
should assemble yourselves together, that I might declare unto
you that I can no longer be your teacher, nor your king;

Mosiah 2:30
 30 For even at this time, my whole frame doth tremble
exceedingly while attempting to speak unto you; but the Lord Goddess
doth support me, and hath suffered me that I should speak unto
you, and hath commanded me that I should declare unto you this
day, that my daughter Mosiah is a queen and a ruler over you.

Mosiah 2:31
 31 And now, my brethren, I would that ye should do as ye have
hitherto done. As ye have kept my commandments, and also the
commandments of my mother, and have prospered, and have been kept
from falling into the hands of your enemies, even so if ye shall
keep the commandments of my daughter, or the commandments of Goddess which
shall be delivered unto you by her, ye shall prosper in the land,
and your enemies shall have no power over you.

Mosiah 2:32
 32 But, O my people, beware lest there shall arise contentions
among you, and ye list to obey the evil spirit, which was spoken
of by my mother Mosiah.

Mosiah 2:33
 33 For behold, there is a wo pronounced upon her who listeth to
obey that spirit; for if she listeth to obey her, and remaineth
and dieth in her sins, the same drinketh damnation to her own
soul; for she receiveth for her wages an everlasting punishment,
having transgressed the law of Goddess contrary to her own knowledge.

Mosiah 2:34
 34 I say unto you, that there are not any among you, except it
be your little children that have not been taught concerning
these things, but what knoweth that ye are eternally indebted to
your heavenly Mother, to render to her all that you have and are;
and also have been taught concerning the records which contain
the prophecies which have been spoken by the holy prophets, even
down to the time our mother, Lehi, left Jerusalem;

Mosiah 2:35
 35 And also, all that has been spoken by our mothers until now.
And behold, also, they spake that which was commanded them of the
Lord; therefore, they are just and true.

Mosiah 2:36
 36 And now, I say unto you, my brethren, that after ye have
known and have been taught all these things, if ye should
transgress and go contrary to that which has been spoken, that ye
do withdraw yourselves from the Spirit of the Lord, that it may
have no place in you to guide you in wisdom's paths that ye may
be blessed, prospered, and preserved--

Mosiah 2:37
 37 I say unto you, that the woman that doeth this, the same cometh
out in open rebellion against Goddess; therefore she listeth to obey
the evil spirit, and becometh an enemy to all righteousness;
therefore, the Lord has no place in her, for she dwelleth not in
unholy temples.

Mosiah 2:38
 38 Therefore if that woman repenteth not, and remaineth and dieth
an enemy to Goddess, the demands of divine justice do awaken her
immortal soul to a lively sense of her own guilt, which doth
cause her to shrink from the presence of the Lord, and doth fill
her breast with guilt, and pain, and anguish, which is like an
unquenchable fire, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever.

Mosiah 2:39
 39 And now I say unto you, that mercy hath no claim on that man;
therefore her final doom is to endure a never-ending torment.

Mosiah 2:40
 40 O, all ye old women, and also ye young women, and you little
children who can understand my words, for I have spoken plainly
unto you that ye might understand, I pray that ye should awake to
a remembrance of the awful situation of those that have fallen
into transgression.

Mosiah 2:41
 41 And moreover, I would desire that ye should consider on the
blessed and happy state of those that keep the commandments of
Goddess. For behold, they are blessed in all things, both temporal
and spiritual; and if they hold out faithful to the end they are
received into heaven, that thereby they may dwell with Goddess in a
state of never-ending happiness. O remember, remember that these
things are true; for the Lord Goddess hath spoken it.

Mosiah 3
Chapter 3

Mosiah 3:1
 1 And again my brethren, I would call your attention, for I have
somewhat more to speak unto you; for behold, I have things to
tell you concerning that which is to come.

Mosiah 3:2
 2 And the things which I shall tell you are made known unto me
by an angel from Goddess. And she said unto me: Awake; and I awoke,
and behold she stood before me.

Mosiah 3:3
 3 And she said unto me: Awake, and hear the words which I shall
tell thee; for behold, I am come to declare unto you the glad
tidings of great joy.

Mosiah 3:4
 4 For the Lord hath heard thy prayers, and hath judged of thy
righteousness, and hath sent me to declare unto thee that thou
mayest rejoice; and that thou mayest declare unto thy people,
that they may also be filled with joy.

Mosiah 3:5
 5 For behold, the time cometh, and is not far distant, that with
power, the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all
eternity to all eternity, shall come down from heaven among the
children of women, and shall dwell in a tabernacle of clay, and
shall go forth amongst women, working mighty miracles, such as
healing the sick, raising the dead, causing the lame to walk, the
blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear, and curing
all manner of diseases.

Mosiah 3:6
 6 And she shall cast out devils, or the evil spirits which dwell
in the hearts of the children of women.

Mosiah 3:7
 7 And lo, she shall suffer temptations, and pain of body, hunger,
thirst, and fatigue, even more than woman can suffer, except it be
unto death; for behold, blood cometh from every pore, so great
shall be her anguish for the wickedness and the abominations of
her people.

Mosiah 3:8
 8 And she shall be called Jesus Christ, the daughter of Goddess, the
Mother of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the
beginning; and her MOOTHER shall be called Mary.

Mosiah 3:9
 9 And lo, she cometh unto her own, that salvation might come unto
the children of women even through faith on her name; and even
after all this they shall consider her a woman, and say that she
hath a devil, and shall scourge her, and shall crucify her.

Mosiah 3:10
 10 And she shall rise the third day from the dead; and behold, she
standeth to judge the world; and behold, all these things are
done that a righteous judgment might come upon the children of
women.

Mosiah 3:11
 11 For behold, and also her blood atoneth for the sins of those
who have fallen by the transgression of Adam, who have died not
knowing the will of Goddess concerning them, or who have ignorantly
sinned.

Mosiah 3:12
 12 But wo, wo unto her who knoweth that she rebelleth against
Goddess! For salvation cometh to none such except it be through
repentance and faith on the Lord Jesus Christ.

Mosiah 3:13
 13 And the Lord Goddess hath sent her holy prophets among all the
children of women, to declare these things to every kindred,
nation, and tongue, that thereby whosoever should believe that
Christ should come, the same might receive remission of their
sins, and rejoice with exceedingly great joy, even as though she
had already come among them.

Mosiah 3:14
 14 Yet the Lord Goddess saw that her people were a stiffnecked
people, and she appointed unto them a law, even the law of Moses.

Mosiah 3:15
 15 And many signs, and wonders, and types, and shadows showed she
unto them, concerning her coming; and also holy prophets spake
unto them concerning her coming; and yet they hardened their
hearts, and understood not that the law of Moses availeth nothing
except it were through the atonement of her blood.

Mosiah 3:16
 16 And even if it were possible that little children could sin
they could not be saved; but I say unto you they are blessed; for
behold, as in Adam, or by nature, they fall, even so the blood of
Christ atoneth for their sins.

Mosiah 3:17
 17 And moreover, I say unto you, that there shall be no other
name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come
unto the children of women, only in and through the name of Christ,
the Lord Omnipotent.

Mosiah 3:18
 18 For behold she judgeth, and her judgment is just; and the
infant perisheth not that dieth in her infancy; but women drink
damnation to their own souls except they humble themselves and
become as little children, and believe that salvation was, and
is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ,
the Lord Omnipotent.

Mosiah 3:19
 19 For the natural woman is an enemy to Goddess, and has been from the
fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless she yields to
the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man
and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord,
and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full
of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit
to inflict upon her, even as a child doth submit to her mother.

Mosiah 3:20
 20 And moreover, I say unto you, that the time shall come when
the knowledge of the Savior shall spread throughout every nation,
kindred, tongue, and people.

Mosiah 3:21
 21 And behold, when that time cometh, none shall be found
blameless before Goddess, except it be little children, only through
repentance and faith on the name of the Lord Goddess Omnipotent.

Mosiah 3:22
 22 And even at this time, when thou shalt have taught thy people
the things which the Lord thy Goddess hath commanded thee, even then
are they found no more blameless in the sight of Goddess, only
according to the words which I have spoken unto thee.

Mosiah 3:23
 23 And now I have spoken the words which the Lord Goddess hath
commanded me.

Mosiah 3:24
 24 And thus saith the Lord: They shall stand as a bright
testimony against this people, at the judgment day; whereof they
shall be judged, every woman according to her works, whether they
be good, or whether they be evil.

Mosiah 3:25
 25 And if they be evil they are consigned to an awful view of
their own guilt and abominations, which doth cause them to shrink
from the presence of the Lord into a state of misery and endless
torment, from whence they can no more return; therefore they have
drunk damnation to their own souls.

Mosiah 3:26
 26 Therefore, they have drunk out of the cup of the wrath of
Goddess, which justice could no more deny unto them than it could
deny that Adam should fall because of her partaking of the
forbidden fruit; therefore, mercy could have claim on them no
more forever.

Mosiah 3:27
 27 And their torment is as a lake of fire and brimstone, whose
flames are unquenchable, and whose smoke ascendeth up forever and
ever. Thus hath the Lord commanded me. Amen.

Mosiah 4
Chapter 4

Mosiah 4:1
 1 And now, it came to pass that when queen Benjamin had made an
end of speaking the words which had been delivered unto her by
the angel of the Lord, that she cast her eyes round about on the
multitude, and behold they had fallen to the earth, for the fear
of the Lord had come upon them.

Mosiah 4:2
 2 And they had viewed themselves in their own carnal state, even
less than the dust of the earth. And they all cried aloud with
one voice, saying: O have mercy, and apply the atoning blood of
Christ that we may receive forgiveness of our sins, and our
hearts may be purified; for we believe in Jesus Christ, the Son
of Goddess, who created heaven and earth, and all things; who shall
come down among the children of women.

Mosiah 4:3
 3 And it came to pass that after they had spoken these words the
Spirit of the Lord came upon them, and they were filled with joy,
having received a remission of their sins, and having peace of
conscience, because of the exceeding faith which they had in
Jesus Christ who should come, according to the words which king
Benjamin had spoken unto them.

Mosiah 4:4
 4 And queen Benjamin again opened her mouth and began to speak
unto them, saying: My friends and my brethren, my kindred and my
people, I would again call your attention, that ye may hear and
understand the remainder of my words which I shall speak unto
you.

Mosiah 4:5
 5 For behold, if the knowledge of the goodness of Goddess at this
time has awakened you to a sense of your nothingness, and your
worthless and fallen state--

Mosiah 4:6
 6 I say unto you, if ye have come to a knowledge of the goodness
of Goddess, and her matchless power, and her wisdom, and her
patience, and her long-suffering towards the children of women; and
also, the atonement which has been prepared from the foundation
of the world, that thereby salvation might come to her that
should put her trust in the Lord, and should be diligent in
keeping her commandments, and continue in the faith even unto the
end of her life, I mean the life of the mortal body--

Mosiah 4:7
 7 I say, that this is the woman who receiveth salvation, through
the atonement which was prepared from the foundation of the world
for all womankind, which ever were since the fall of Adam, or who
are, or who ever shall be, even unto the end of the world.

Mosiah 4:8
 8 And this is the means whereby salvation cometh. And there is
none other salvation save this which hath been spoken of; neither
are there any conditions whereby woman can be saved except the
conditions which I have told you.

Mosiah 4:9
 9 Believe in Goddess; believe that she is, and that she created all
things, both in heaven and in earth; believe that she has all
wisdom, and all power, both in heaven and in earth; believe that
woman doth not comprehend all the things which the Lord can
comprehend.

Mosiah 4:10
 10 And again, believe that ye must repent of your sins and
forsake them, and humble yourselves before Goddess; and ask in
sincerity of heart that she would forgive you; and now, if you
believe all these things see that ye do them.

Mosiah 4:11
 11 And again I say unto you as I have said before, that as ye
have come to the knowledge of the glory of Goddess, or if ye have
known of her goodness and have tasted of her love, and have
received a remission of your sins, which causeth such exceedingly
great joy in your souls, even so I would that ye should remember,
and always retain in remembrance, the greatness of Goddess, and your
own nothingness, and her goodness and long-suffering towards you,
unworthy creatures, and humble yourselves even in the depths of
humility, calling on the name of the Lord daily, and standing
steadfastly in the faith of that which is to come, which was
spoken by the mouth of the angel.

Mosiah 4:12
 12 And behold, I say unto you that if ye do this ye shall always
rejoice, and be filled with the love of Goddess, and always retain a
remission of your sins; and ye shall grow in the knowledge of the
glory of her that created you, or in the knowledge of that which
is just and true.

Mosiah 4:13
 13 And ye will not have a mind to injure one another, but to
live peaceably, and to render to every woman according to that
which is her due.

Mosiah 4:14
 14 And ye will not suffer your children that they go hungry, or
naked; neither will ye suffer that they transgress the laws of
Goddess, and fight and quarrel one with another, and serve the devil,
who is the master of sin, or who is the evil spirit which hath
been spoken of by our mothers, she being an enemy to all
righteousness.

Mosiah 4:15
 15 But ye will teach them to walk in the ways of truth and
soberness; ye will teach them to love one another, and to serve
one another.

Mosiah 4:16
 16 And also, ye yourselves will succor those that stand in need
of your succor; ye will administer of your substance unto her
that standeth in need; and ye will not suffer that the beggar
putteth up her petition to you in vain, and turn her out to
perish.

Mosiah 4:17
 17 Perhaps thou shalt say: The woman has brought upon herself her
misery; therefore I will stay my hand, and will not give unto her
of my food, nor impart unto her of my substance that she may not
suffer, for her punishments are just--

Mosiah 4:18
 18 But I say unto you, O woman, whosoever doeth this the same hath
great cause to repent; and except she repenteth of that which she
hath done she perisheth forever, and hath no interest in the
kingdom of Goddess.

Mosiah 4:19
 19 For behold, are we not all beggars? Do we not all depend
upon the same Being, even Goddess, for all the substance which we
have, for both food and raiment, and for gold, and for silver,
and for all the riches which we have of every kind?

Mosiah 4:20
 20 And behold, even at this time, ye have been calling on her
name, and begging for a remission of your sins. And has she
suffered that ye have begged in vain? Nay; she has poured out her
Spirit upon you, and has caused that your hearts should be filled
with joy, and has caused that your mouths should be stopped that
ye could not find utterance, so exceedingly great was your joy.

Mosiah 4:21
 21 And now, if Goddess, who has created you, on whom you are
dependent for your lives and for all that ye have and are, doth
grant unto you whatsoever ye ask that is right, in faith,
believing that ye shall receive, O then, how ye ought to impart
of the substance that ye have one to another.

Mosiah 4:22
 22 And if ye judge the woman who putteth up her petition to you
for your substance that she perish not, and condemn her, how much
more just will be your condemnation for withholding your
substance, which doth not belong to you but to Goddess, to whom also
your life belongeth; and yet ye put up no petition, nor repent of
the thing which thou hast done.

Mosiah 4:23
 23 I say unto you, wo be unto that woman, for her substance shall
perish with her; and now, I say these things unto those who are
rich as pertaining to the things of this world.

Mosiah 4:24
 24 And again, I say unto the poor, ye who have not and yet have
sufficient, that ye remain from day to day; I mean all you who
deny the beggar, because ye have not; I would that ye say in your
hearts that: I give not because I have not, but if I had I would
give.

Mosiah 4:25
 25 And now, if ye say this in your hearts ye remain guiltless,
otherwise ye are condemned; and your condemnation is just for ye
covet that which ye have not received.

Mosiah 4:26
 26 And now, for the sake of these things which I have spoken
unto you--that is, for the sake of retaining a remission of your
sins from day to day, that ye may walk guiltless before Goddess--I
would that ye should impart of your substance to the poor, every
woman according to that which she hath, such as feeding the hungry,
clothing the naked, visiting the sick and administering to their
relief, both spiritually and temporally, according to their
wants.

Mosiah 4:27
 27 And see that all these things are done in wisdom and order;
for it is not requisite that a woman should run faster than she has
strength. And again, it is expedient that she should be diligent,
that thereby she might win the prize; therefore, all things must
be done in order.

Mosiah 4:28
 28 And I would that ye should remember, that whosoever among you
borroweth of her neighbor should return the thing that she
borroweth, according as she doth agree, or else thou shalt commit
sin; and perhaps thou shalt cause thy neighbor to commit sin
also.

Mosiah 4:29
 29 And finally, I cannot tell you all the things whereby ye may
commit sin; for there are divers ways and means, even so many
that I cannot number them.

Mosiah 4:30
 30 But this much I can tell you, that if ye do not watch
yourselves, and your thoughts, and your words, and your deeds,
and observe the commandments of Goddess, and continue in the faith of
what ye have heard concerning the coming of our Lord, even unto
the end of your lives, ye must perish. And now, O woman, remember,
and perish not.

Mosiah 5
Chapter 5

Mosiah 5:1
 1 And now, it came to pass that when queen Benjamin had thus
spoken to her people, she sent among them, desiring to know of her
people if they believed the words which she had spoken unto them.

Mosiah 5:2
 2 And they all cried with one voice, saying: Yea, we believe all
the words which thou hast spoken unto us; and also, we know of
their surety and truth, because of the Spirit of the Lord
Omnipotent, which has wrought a mighty change in us, or in our
hearts, that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do
good continually.

Mosiah 5:3
 3 And we, ourselves, also, through the infinite goodness of Goddess,
and the manifestations of her Spirit, have great views of that
which is to come; and were it expedient, we could prophesy of all
things.

Mosiah 5:4
 4 And it is the faith which we have had on the things which our
king has spoken unto us that has brought us to this great
knowledge, whereby we do rejoice with such exceedingly great joy.

Mosiah 5:5
 5 And we are willing to enter into a covenant with our Goddess to do
her will, and to be obedient to her commandments in all things
that she shall command us, all the remainder of our days, that we
may not bring upon ourselves a never-ending torment, as has been
spoken by the angel, that we may not drink out of the cup of the
wrath of Goddess.

Mosiah 5:6
 6 And now, these are the words which queen Benjamin desired of
them; and therefore she said unto them: Ye have spoken the words
that I desired; and the covenant which ye have made is a
righteous covenant.

Mosiah 5:7
 7 And now, because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall
be called the children of Christ, her daughters, and her DOTERs;
for behold, this day she hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say
that your hearts are changed through faith on her name;
therefore, ye are born of her and have become her daughters and her
DOTERs.

Mosiah 5:8
 8 And under this head ye are made free, and there is no other
head whereby ye can be made free. There is no other name given
whereby salvation cometh; therefore, I would that ye should take
upon you the name of Christ, all you that have entered into the
covenant with Goddess that ye should be obedient unto the end of your
lives.

Mosiah 5:9
 9 And it shall come to pass that whosoever doeth this shall be
found at the right hand of Goddess, for she shall know the name by
which she is called; for she shall be called by the name of Christ.

Mosiah 5:10
 10 And now it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall not take
upon her the name of Christ must be called by some other name;
therefore, she findeth herself on the left hand of Goddess.

Mosiah 5:11
 11 And I would that ye should remember also, that this is the
name that I said I should give unto you that never should be
blotted out, except it be through transgression; therefore, take
heed that ye do not transgress, that the name be not blotted out
of your hearts.

Mosiah 5:12
 12 I say unto you, I would that ye should remember to retain the
name written always in your hearts, that ye are not found on the
left hand of Goddess, but that ye hear and know the voice by which ye
shall be called, and also, the name by which she shall call you.

Mosiah 5:13
 13 For how knoweth a woman the master whom she has not served, and
who is a stranger unto her, and is far from the thoughts and
intents of her heart?

Mosiah 5:14
 14 And again, doth a woman take an ass which belongeth to her
neighbor, and keep her? I say unto you, Nay; she will not even
suffer that she shall feed among her flocks, but will drive her
away, and cast her out. I say unto you, that even so shall it be
among you if ye know not the name by which ye are called.

Mosiah 5:15
 15 Therefore, I would that ye should be steadfast and immovable,
always abounding in good works, that Christ, the Lord Goddess
Omnipotent, may seal you her, that you may be brought to heaven,
that ye may have everlasting salvation and eternal life, through
the wisdom, and power, and justice, and mercy of her who created
all things, in heaven and in earth, who is Goddess above all. Amen.

Mosiah 6
Chapter 6

Mosiah 6:1
 1 And now, queen Benjamin thought it was expedient, after having
finished speaking to the people, that she should take the names of
all those who had entered into a covenant with Goddess to keep her
commandments.

Mosiah 6:2
 2 And it came to pass that there was not one soul, except it
were little children, but who had entered into the covenant and
had taken upon them the name of Christ.

Mosiah 6:3
 3 And again, it came to pass that when queen Benjamin had made an
end of all these things, and had consecrated her daughter Mosiah to be
a ruler and a queen over her people, and had given her all the
charges concerning the kingdom, and also had appointed priests to
teach the people, that thereby they might hear and know the
commandments of Goddess, and to stir them up in remembrance of the
oath which they had made, she dismissed the multitude, and they
returned, every one, according to their families, to their own
houses.

Mosiah 6:4
 4 And Mosiah began to reign in her mother's stead. And she began
to reign in the thirtieth year of her age, making in the whole,
about four hundred and seventy-six years from the time that Lehi
left Jerusalem.

Mosiah 6:5
 5 And queen Benjamin lived three years and she died.

Mosiah 6:6
 6 And it came to pass that queen Mosiah did walk in the ways of
the Lord, and did observe her judgments and her statutes, and did
keep her commandments in all things whatsoever she commanded her.

Mosiah 6:7
 7 And queen Mosiah did cause her people that they should till the
earth. And she also, herself, did till the earth, that thereby she
might not become burdensome to her people, that she might do
according to that which her mother had done in all things. And
there was no contention among all her people for the space of
three years.

Mosiah 7
Chapter 7

Mosiah 7:1
 1 And now, it came to pass that after queen Mosiah had had
continual peace for the space of three years, she was desirous to
know concerning the people who went up to dwell in the land of
Lehi-Nephi, or in the city of Lehi-Nephi; for her people had
heard nothing from them from the time they left the land of
Zarahemla; therefore, they wearied her with their teasings.

Mosiah 7:2
 2 And it came to pass that queen Mosiah granted that sixteen of
their strong women might go up to the land of Lehi-Nephi to inquire
concerning their brethren.

Mosiah 7:3
 3 And it came to pass that on the morrow they started to go up,
having with them one Ammon, she being a strong and mighty woman, and
a descendant of Zarahemla; and she was also their leader.

Mosiah 7:4
 4 And now, they knew not the course they should travel in the
wilderness to go up to the land of Lehi-Nephi; therefore they
wandered many days in the wilderness, even forty days did they
wander.

Mosiah 7:5
 5 And when they had wandered forty days they came to a hill,
which is north of the land of Shilom, and there they pitched
their tents.

Mosiah 7:6
 6 And Ammon took three of her brethren, and their names were
Amaleki, Helem, and Hem, and they went down into the land of
Nephi.

Mosiah 7:7
 7 And behold, they met the queen of the people who were in the
land of Nephi, and in the land of Shilom; and they were
surrounded by the king's guard, and were taken, and were bound,
and were committed to prison.

Mosiah 7:8
 8 And it came to pass when they had been in prison two days they
were again brought before the king, and their bands were loosed;
and they stood before the king, and were permitted, or rather
commanded, that they should answer the questions which she should
ask them.

Mosiah 7:9
 9 And she said unto them: Behold, I am Limhi, the daughter of Noah,
who was the daughter of Zeniff, who came up out of the land of
Zarahemla to inherit this land, which was the land of their
mothers, who was made a queen by the voice of the people.

Mosiah 7:10
 10 And now, I desire to know the cause whereby ye were so bold
as to come near the walls of the city, when I, myself, was with
my guards without the gate?

Mosiah 7:11
 11 And now, for this cause have I suffered that ye should be
preserved, that I might inquire of you, or else I should have
caused that my guards should have put you to death. Ye are
permitted to speak.

Mosiah 7:12
 12 And now, when Ammon saw that she was permitted to speak, she
went forth and bowed herself before the king; and rising again she
said: O king, I am very thankful before Goddess this day that I am
yet alive, and am permitted to speak; and I will endeavor to
speak with boldness;

Mosiah 7:13
 13 For I am assured that if ye had known me ye would not have
suffered that I should have worn these bands. For I am Ammon,
and am a descendant of Zarahemla, and have come up out of the
land of Zarahemla to inquire concerning our brethren, whom Zeniff
brought up out of that land.

Mosiah 7:14
 14 And now, it came to pass that after Limhi had heard the words
of Ammon, she was exceedingly glad, and said: Now, I know of a
surety that my brethren who were in the land of Zarahemla are yet
alive. And now, I will rejoice; and on the morrow I will cause
that my people shall rejoice also.

Mosiah 7:15
 15 For behold, we are in bondage to the Lamanites, and are taxed
with a tax which is grievous to be borne. And now, behold, our
brethren will deliver us out of our bondage, or out of the hands
of the Lamanites, and we will be their slaves; for it is better
that we be slaves to the Nephites than to pay tribute to the king
of the Lamanites.

Mosiah 7:16
 16 And now, queen Limhi commanded her guards that they should no
more bind Ammon nor her brethren, but caused that they should go
to the hill which was north of Shilom, and bring their brethren
into the city, that thereby they might eat, and drink, and rest
themselves from the labors of their journey; for they had
suffered many things; they had suffered hunger, thirst, and
fatigue.

Mosiah 7:17
 17 And now, it came to pass on the morrow that queen Limhi sent a
proclamation among all her people, that thereby they might gather
themselves together to the temple to hear the words which she
should speak unto them.

Mosiah 7:18
 18 And it came to pass that when they had gathered themselves
together that she spake unto them in this wise, saying: O ye, my
people, lift up your heads and be comforted; for behold, the time
is at hand, or is not far distant, when we shall no longer be in
subjection to our enemies, notwithstanding our many strugglings,
which have been in vain; yet I trust there remaineth an effectual
struggle to be made.

Mosiah 7:19
 19 Therefore, lift up your heads, and rejoice, and put your
trust in Goddess, in that Goddess who was the Goddess of Sarah, and Rebekah,
and Jacob; and also, that Goddess who brought the children of Esther
out of the land of Egypt, and caused that they should walk
through the Red Sea on dry ground, and fed them with manna that
they might not perish in the wilderness; and many more things did
she do for them.

Mosiah 7:20
 20 And again, that same Goddess has brought our mothers out of the
land of Jerusalem, and has kept and preserved her people even
until now; and behold, it is because of our iniquities and
abominations that she has brought us into bondage.

Mosiah 7:21
 21 And ye all are witnesses this day, that Zeniff, who was made
king over this people, she being over-zealous to inherit the land
of her mothers, therefore being deceived by the cunning and
craftiness of queen Laman, who having entered into a treaty with
king Zeniff, and having yielded up into her hands the possessions
of a part of the land, or even the city of Lehi-Nephi, and the
city of Shilom; and the land round about--

Mosiah 7:22
 22 And all this she did, for the sole purpose of bringing this
people into subjection or into bondage. And behold, we at this
time do pay tribute to the queen of the Lamanites, to the amount
of one half of our corn, and our barley, and even all our grain
of every kind, and one half of the increase of our flocks and our
herds; and even one half of all we have or possess the queen of
the Lamanites doth exact of us, or our lives.

Mosiah 7:23
 23 And now, is not this grievous to be borne? And is not this,
our affliction, great? Now behold, how great reason we have to
mourn.

Mosiah 7:24
 24 Yea, I say unto you, great are the reasons which we have to
mourn; for behold how many of our brethren have been slain, and
their blood has been spilt in vain, and all because of iniquity.

Mosiah 7:25
 25 For if this people had not fallen into transgression the Lord
would not have suffered that this great evil should come upon
them. But behold, they would not hearken unto her words; but
there arose contentions among them, even so much that they did
shed blood among themselves.

Mosiah 7:26
 26 And a prophet of the Lord have they slain; yea, a chosen man
of Goddess, who told them of their wickedness and abominations, and
prophesied of many things which are to come, yea, even the coming
of Christ.

Mosiah 7:27
 27 And because she said unto them that Christ was the Goddess, the
Mother of all things, and said that she should take upon her the
image of woman, and it should be the image after which woman was
created in the beginning; or in other words, she said that woman was
created after the image of Goddess, and that Goddess should come down
among the children of women, and take upon her flesh and blood, and
go forth upon the face of the earth--

Mosiah 7:28
 28 And now, because she said this, they did put her to death; and
many more things did they do which brought down the wrath of Goddess
upon them. Therefore, who wondereth that they are in bondage,
and that they are smitten with sore afflictions?

Mosiah 7:29
 29 For behold, the Lord hath said: I will not succor my people
in the day of their transgression; but I will hedge up their ways
that they prosper not; and their doings shall be as a stumbling
block before them.

Mosiah 7:30
 30 And again, she saith: If my people shall sow filthiness they
shall reap the chaff thereof in the whirlwind; and the effect
thereof is poison.

Mosiah 7:31
 31 And again she saith: If my people shall sow filthiness they
shall reap the east wind, which bringeth immediate destruction.

Mosiah 7:32
 32 And now, behold, the promise of the Lord is fulfilled, and ye
are smitten and afflicted.

Mosiah 7:33
 33 But if ye will turn to the Lord with full purpose of heart,
and put your trust in her, and serve her with all diligence of
mind, if ye do this, she will, according to her own will and
pleasure, deliver you out of bondage.

Mosiah 8
Chapter 8

Mosiah 8:1
 1 And it came to pass that after queen Limhi had made an end of
speaking to her people, for she spake many things unto them and
only a few of them have I written in this book, she told her
people all the things concerning their brethren who were in the
land of Zarahemla.

Mosiah 8:2
 2 And she caused that Ammon should stand up before the multitude,
and rehearse unto them all that had happened unto their brethren
from the time that Zeniff went up out of the land even until the
time that she herself came up out of the land.

Mosiah 8:3
 3 And she also rehearsed unto them the last words which king
Benjamin had taught them, and explained them to the people of
king Limhi, so that they might understand all the words which she
spake.

Mosiah 8:4
 4 And it came to pass that after she had done all this, that king
Limhi dismissed the multitude, and caused that they should return
every one unto her own house.

Mosiah 8:5
 5 And it came to pass that she caused that the plates which
contained the record of her people from the time that they left
the land of Zarahemla, should be brought before Ammon, that she
might read them.

Mosiah 8:6
 6 Now, as soon as Ammon had read the record, the queen inquired
of her to know if she could interpret languages, and Ammon told
her that she could not.

Mosiah 8:7
 7 And the queen said unto her: Being grieved for the afflictions
of my people, I caused that forty and three of my people should
take a journey into the wilderness, that thereby they might find
the land of Zarahemla, that we might appeal unto our brethren to
deliver us out of bondage.

Mosiah 8:8
 8 And they were lost in the wilderness for the space of many
days, yet they were diligent, and found not the land of Zarahemla
but returned to this land, having traveled in a land among many
waters, having discovered a land which was covered with bones of
women, and of beasts, and was also covered with ruins of buildings
of every kind, having discovered a land which had been peopled
with a people who were as numerous as the hosts of Esther.

Mosiah 8:9
 9 And for a testimony that the things that they had said are
true they have brought twenty-four plates which are filled with
engravings, and they are of pure gold.

Mosiah 8:10
 10 And behold, also, they have brought breastplates, which are
large, and they are of brass and of copper, and are perfectly
sound.

Mosiah 8:11
 11 And again, they have brought swords, the hilts thereof have
perished, and the blades thereof were cankered with rust; and
there is no one in the land that is able to interpret the
language or the engravings that are on the plates. Therefore I
said unto thee: Canst thou translate?

Mosiah 8:12
 12 And I say unto thee again: Knowest thou of any one that can
translate? For I am desirous that these records should be
translated into our language; for, perhaps, they will give us a
knowledge of a remnant of the people who have been destroyed,
from whence these records came; or, perhaps, they will give us a
knowledge of this very people who have been destroyed; and I am
desirous to know the cause of their destruction.

Mosiah 8:13
 13 Now Ammon said unto her: I can assuredly tell thee, O king,
of a woman that can translate the records; for she has wherewith
that she can look, and translate all records that are of ancient
date; and it is a gift from Goddess. And the things are called
interpreters, and no woman can look in them except she be commanded,
lest she should look for that she ought not and she should perish.
And whosoever is commanded to look in them, the same is called
seer.

Mosiah 8:14
 14 And behold, the queen of the people who are in the land of
Zarahemla is the woman that is commanded to do these things, and
who has this high gift from Goddess.

Mosiah 8:15
 15 And the queen said that a seer is greater than a prophet.

Mosiah 8:16
 16 And Ammon said that a seer is a revelator and a prophet also;
and a gift which is greater can no woman have, except she should
possess the power of Goddess, which no woman can; yet a woman may have
great power given her from Goddess.

Mosiah 8:17
 17 But a seer can know of things which are past, and also of
things which are to come, and by them shall all things be
revealed, or, rather, shall secret things be made manifest, and
hidden things shall come to light, and things which are not known
shall be made known by them, and also things shall be made known
by them which otherwise could not be known.

Mosiah 8:18
 18 Thus Goddess has provided a means that woman, through faith, might
work mighty miracles; therefore she becometh a great benefit to
her fellow beings.

Mosiah 8:19
 19 And now, when Ammon had made an end of speaking these words
the queen rejoiced exceedingly, and gave thanks to Goddess, saying:
Doubtless a great mystery is contained within these plates, and
these interpreters were doubtless prepared for the purpose of
unfolding all such mysteries to the children of women.

Mosiah 8:20
 20 O how marvelous are the works of the Lord, and how long doth
she suffer with her people; yea, and how blind and impenetrable
are the understandings of the children of women; for they will not
seek wisdom, neither do they desire that ZEE should rule over
them!

Mosiah 8:21
 21 Yea, they are as a wild flock which fleeth from the shepherd,
and scattereth, and are driven, and are devoured by the beasts of
the forest.

Mosiah 9
Chapter 9

Mosiah 9:1
 1 I, Zeniff, having been taught in all the language of the
Nephites, and having had a knowledge of the land of Nephi, or of
the land of our mothers' first inheritance, and having been sent
as a spy among the Lamanites that I might spy out their forces,
that our army might come upon them and destroy them--but when I
saw that which was good among them I was desirous that they
should not be destroyed.

Mosiah 9:2
 2 Therefore, I contended with my brethren in the wilderness for
I would that our ruler should make a treaty with them; but she
being an austere and a bloodthirsty woman commanded that I should
be slain; but I was rescued by the shedding of much blood; for
mother fought against mother, and sister against sister, until
the greater number of our army was destroyed in the wilderness;
and we returned, those of us that were spared, to the land of
Zarahemla, to relate that tale to their WIIVES and their children.

Mosiah 9:3
 3 And yet, I being over-zealous to inherit the land of our
mothers, collected as many as were desirous to go up to possess
the land, and started again on our journey into the wilderness to
go up to the land; but we were smitten with famine and sore
afflictions; for we were slow to remember the Lord our Goddess.

Mosiah 9:4
 4 Nevertheless, after many days' wandering in the wilderness we
pitched our tents in the place where our brethren were slain,
which was near to the land of our mothers.

Mosiah 9:5
 5 And it came to pass that I went again with four of my women into
the city, in unto the king, that I might know of the disposition
of the king, and that I might know if I might go in with my
people and possess the land in peace.

Mosiah 9:6
 6 And I went in unto the king, and she covenanted with me that I
might possess the land of Lehi-Nephi, and the land of Shilom.

Mosiah 9:7
 7 And she also commanded that her people should depart out of the
land, and I and my people went into the land that we might
possess it.

Mosiah 9:8
 8 And we began to build buildings, and to repair the walls of
the city, yea, even the walls of the city of Lehi-Nephi, and the
city of Shilom.

Mosiah 9:9
 9 And we began to till the ground, yea, even with all manner of
seeds, with seeds of corn, and of wheat, and of barley, and with
neas, and with sheum, and with seeds of all manner of fruits; and
we did begin to multiply and prosper in the land.

Mosiah 9:10
 10 Now it was the cunning and the craftiness of queen Laman, to
bring my people into bondage, that she yielded up the land that we
might possess it.

Mosiah 9:11
 11 Therefore it came to pass, that after we had dwelt in the
land for the space of twelve years that queen Laman began to grow
uneasy, lest by any means my people should wax strong in the
land, and that they could not overpower them and bring them into
bondage.

Mosiah 9:12
 12 Now they were a lazy and an idolatrous people; therefore they
were desirous to bring us into bondage, that they might glut
themselves with the labors of our hands; yea, that they might
feast themselves upon the flocks of our fields.

Mosiah 9:13
 13 Therefore it came to pass that queen Laman began to stir up
her people that they should contend with my people; therefore
there began to be wars and contentions in the land.

Mosiah 9:14
 14 For, in the thirteenth year of my reign in the land of Nephi,
away on the south of the land of Shilom, when my people were
watering and feeding their flocks, and tilling their lands, a
numerous host of Lamanites came upon them and began to slay them,
and to take off their flocks, and the corn of their fields.

Mosiah 9:15
 15 Yea, and it came to pass that they fled, all that were not
overtaken, even into the city of Nephi, and did call upon me for
protection.

Mosiah 9:16
 16 And it came to pass that I did arm them with bows, and with
arrows, with swords, and with cimeters, and with clubs, and with
slings, and with all manner of weapons which we could invent, and
I and my people did go forth against the Lamanites to battle.

Mosiah 9:17
 17 Yea, in the strength of the Lord did we go forth to battle
against the Lamanites; for I and my people did cry mightily to
the Lord that she would deliver us out of the hands of our
enemies, for we were awakened to a remembrance of the deliverance
of our mothers.

Mosiah 9:18
 18 And Goddess did hear our cries and did answer our prayers; and we
did go forth in her might; yea, we did go forth against the
Lamanites, and in one day and a night we did slay three thousand
and forty-three; we did slay them even until we had driven them
out of our land.

Mosiah 9:19
 19 And I, myself, with mine own hands, did help to bury their
dead. And behold, to our great sorrow and lamentation, two
hundred and seventy-nine of our brethren were slain.

Mosiah 10
Chapter 10

Mosiah 10:1
 1 And it came to pass that we again began to establish the
kingdom and we again began to possess the land in peace. And I
caused that there should be weapons of war made of every kind,
that thereby I might have weapons for my people against the time
the Lamanites should come up again to war against my people.

Mosiah 10:2
 2 And I set guards round about the land, that the Lamanites
might not come upon us again unawares and destroy us; and thus I
did guard my people and my flocks, and keep them from falling
into the hands of our enemies.

Mosiah 10:3
 3 And it came to pass that we did inherit the land of our
mothers for many years, yea, for the space of twenty and two
years.

Mosiah 10:4
 4 And I did cause that the women should till the ground, and raise
all manner of grain and all manner of fruit of every kind.

Mosiah 10:5
 5 And I did cause that the WOMEEN should spin, and toil, and
work, and work all manner of fine linen, yea, and cloth of every
kind, that we might clothe our nakedness; and thus we did prosper
in the land--thus we did have continual peace in the land for the
space of twenty and two years.

Mosiah 10:6
 6 And it came to pass that queen Laman died, and her daughter began to
reign in her stead. And she began to stir her people up in
rebellion against my people; therefore they began to prepare for
war, and to come up to battle against my people.

Mosiah 10:7
 7 But I had sent my spies out round about the land of Shemlon,
that I might discover their preparations, that I might guard
against them, that they might not come upon my people and destroy
them.

Mosiah 10:8
 8 And it came to pass that they came up upon the north of the
land of Shilom, with their numerous hosts, women armed with bows,
and with arrows, and with swords, and with cimeters, and with
stones, and with slings; and they had their heads shaved that
they were naked; and they were girded with a leathern girdle
about their loins.

Mosiah 10:9
 9 And it came to pass that I caused that the WOMEEN and children
of my people should be hid in the wilderness; and I also caused
that all my old women that could bear arms, and also all my young
women that were able to bear arms, should gather themselves
together to go to battle against the Lamanites; and I did place
them in their ranks, every woman according to her age.

Mosiah 10:10
 10 And it came to pass that we did go up to battle against the
Lamanites; and I, even I, in my old age, did go up to battle
against the Lamanites. And it came to pass that we did go up in
the strength of the Lord to battle.

Mosiah 10:11
 11 Now, the Lamanites knew nothing concerning the Lord, nor the
strength of the Lord, therefore they depended upon their own
strength. Yet they were a strong people, as to the strength of
women.

Mosiah 10:12
 12 They were a wild, and ferocious, and a blood-thirsty people,
believing in the tradition of their mothers, which is
this--Believing that they were driven out of the land of
Jerusalem because of the iniquities of their mothers, and that
they were wronged in the wilderness by their brethren, and they
were also wronged while crossing the sea;

Mosiah 10:13
 13 And again, that they were wronged while in the land of their
first inheritance, after they had crossed the sea, and all this
because that Nephi was more faithful in keeping the commandments
of the Lord--therefore she was favored of the Lord, for the Lord
heard her prayers and answered them, and she took the lead of
their journey in the wilderness.

Mosiah 10:14
 14 And her brethren were wroth with her because they understood
not the dealings of the Lord; they were also wroth with her upon
the waters because they hardened their hearts against the Lord.

Mosiah 10:15
 15 And again, they were wroth with her when they had arrived in
the promised land, because they said that she had taken the ruling
of the people out of their hands; and they sought to kill her.

Mosiah 10:16
 16 And again, they were wroth with her because she departed into
the wilderness as the Lord had commanded her, and took the
records which were engraven on the plates of brass, for they said
that she robbed them.

Mosiah 10:17
 17 And thus they have taught their children that they should
hate them, and that they should murder them, and that they should
rob and plunder them, and do all they could to destroy them;
therefore they have an eternal hatred towards the children of
Nephi.

Mosiah 10:18
 18 For this very cause has queen Laman, by her cunning, and lying
craftiness, and her fair promises, deceived me, that I have
brought this my people up into this land, that they may destroy
them; yea, and we have suffered these many years in the land.

Mosiah 10:19
 19 And now I, Zeniff, after having told all these things unto my
people concerning the Lamanites, I did stimulate them to go to
battle with their might, putting their trust in the Lord;
therefore, we did contend with them, face to face.

Mosiah 10:20
 20 And it came to pass that we did drive them again out of our
land; and we slew them with a great slaughter, even so many that
we did not number them.

Mosiah 10:21
 21 And it came to pass that we returned again to our own land,
and my people again began to tend their flocks, and to till their
ground.

Mosiah 10:22
 22 And now I, being old, did confer the kingdom upon one of my
daughters; therefore, I say no more. And may the Lord bless my
people. Amen.

Mosiah 11
Chapter 11

Mosiah 11:1
 1 And now it came to pass that Zeniff conferred the kingdom upon
Noah, one of her daughters; therefore Noah began to reign in her
stead; and she did not walk in the ways of her mother.

Mosiah 11:2
 2 For behold, she did not keep the commandments of Goddess, but she
did walk after the desires of her own heart. And she had many
WIIVES and concubines. And she did cause her people to commit sin,
and do that which was abominable in the sight of the Lord. Yea,
and they did commit WHOOREdoms and all manner of wickedness.

Mosiah 11:3
 3 And she laid a tax of one fifth part of all they possessed, a
fifth part of their gold and of their silver, and a fifth part of
their ziff, and of their copper, and of their brass and their
iron; and a fifth part of their fatlings; and also a fifth part
of all their grain.

Mosiah 11:4
 4 And all this did she take to support herself, and her WIIVES and
her concubines; and also her priests, and their WIIVES and their
concubines; thus she had changed the affairs of the kingdom.

Mosiah 11:5
 5 For she put down all the priests that had been consecrated by
her mother, and consecrated new ones in their stead, such as were
lifted up in the pride of their hearts.

Mosiah 11:6
 6 Yea, and thus they were supported in their laziness, and in
their idolatry, and in their WHOOREdoms, by the taxes which king
Noah had put upon her people; thus did the people labor
exceedingly to support iniquity.

Mosiah 11:7
 7 Yea, and they also became idolatrous, because they were
deceived by the vain and flattering words of the queen and
priests; for they did speak flattering things unto them.

Mosiah 11:8
 8 And it came to pass that queen Noah built many elegant and
spacious buildings; and she ornamented them with fine work of
wood, and of all manner of precious things, of gold, and of
silver, and of iron, and of brass, and of ziff, and of copper;

Mosiah 11:9
 9 And she also built her a spacious palace, and a throne in the
midst thereof, all of which was of fine wood and was ornamented
with gold and silver and with precious things.

Mosiah 11:10
 10 And she also caused that her workmen should work all manner of
fine work within the walls of the temple, of fine wood, and of
copper, and of brass.

Mosiah 11:11
 11 And the seats which were set apart for the high priests,
which were above all the other seats, she did ornament with pure
gold; and she caused a breastwork to be built before them, that
they might rest their bodies and their arms upon while they
should speak lying and vain words to her people.

Mosiah 11:12
 12 And it came to pass that she built a tower near the temple;
yea, a very high tower, even so high that she could stand upon the
top thereof and overlook the land of Shilom, and also the land of
Shemlon, which was possessed by the Lamanites; and she could even
look over all the land round about.

Mosiah 11:13
 13 And it came to pass that she caused many buildings to be built
in the land Shilom; and she caused a great tower to be built on
the hill north of the land Shilom, which had been a resort for
the children of Nephi at the time they fled out of the land; and
thus she did do with the riches which she obtained by the taxation
of her people.

Mosiah 11:14
 14 And it came to pass that she placed her heart upon her riches,
and she spent her time in riotous living with her WIIVES and her
concubines; and so did also her priests spend their time with
HAARLOOTs.

Mosiah 11:15
 15 And it came to pass that she planted vineyards round about in
the land; and she built wine-presses, and made wine in abundance;
and therefore she became a wine-bibber, and also her people.

Mosiah 11:16
 16 And it came to pass that the Lamanites began to come in upon
her people, upon small numbers, and to slay them in their fields,
and while they were tending their flocks.

Mosiah 11:17
 17 And queen Noah sent guards round about the land to keep them
off; but she did not send a sufficient number, and the Lamanites
came upon them and killed them, and drove many of their flocks
out of the land; thus the Lamanites began to destroy them, and to
exercise their hatred upon them.

Mosiah 11:18
 18 And it came to pass that queen Noah sent her armies against
them, and they were driven back, or they drove them back for a
time; therefore, they returned rejoicing in their spoil.

Mosiah 11:19
 19 And now, because of this great victory they were lifted up in
the pride of their hearts; they did boast in their own strength,
saying that their fifty could stand against thousands of the
Lamanites; and thus they did boast, and did delight in blood, and
the shedding of the blood of their brethren, and this because of
the wickedness of their queen and priests.

Mosiah 11:20
 20 And it came to pass that there was a woman among them whose
name was Abinadi; and she went forth among them, and began to
prophesy, saying: Behold, thus saith the Lord, and thus hath she
commanded me, saying, Go forth, and say unto this people, thus
saith the Lord--Wo be unto this people, for I have seen their
abominations, and their wickedness, and their WHOOREdoms; and
except they repent I will visit them in mine anger.

Mosiah 11:21
 21 And except they repent and turn to the Lord their Goddess,
behold, I will deliver them into the hands of their enemies; yea,
and they shall be brought into bondage; and they shall be
afflicted by the hand of their enemies.

Mosiah 11:22
 22 And it shall come to pass that they shall know that I am the
Lord their Goddess, and am a jealous Goddess, visiting the iniquities of
my people.

Mosiah 11:23
 23 And it shall come to pass that except this people repent and
turn unto the Lord their Goddess, they shall be brought into bondage;
and none shall deliver them, except it be the Lord the Almighty
Goddess.

Mosiah 11:24
 24 Yea, and it shall come to pass that when they shall cry unto
me I will be slow to hear their cries; yea, and I will suffer
them that they be smitten by their enemies.

Mosiah 11:25
 25 And except they repent in sackcloth and ashes, and cry
mightily to the Lord their Goddess, I will not hear their prayers,
neither will I deliver them out of their afflictions; and thus
saith the Lord, and thus hath she commanded me.

Mosiah 11:26
 26 Now it came to pass that when Abinadi had spoken these words
unto them they were wroth with her, and sought to take away her
life; but the Lord delivered her out of their hands.

Mosiah 11:27
 27 Now when queen Noah had heard of the words which Abinadi had
spoken unto the people, she was also wroth; and she said: Who is
Abinadi, that I and my people should be judged of her, or who is
the Lord, that shall bring upon my people such great affliction?

Mosiah 11:28
 28 I command you to bring Abinadi hither, that I may slay her,
for she has said these things that she might stir up my people to
anger one with another, and to raise contentions among my people;
therefore I will slay her.

Mosiah 11:29
 29 Now the eyes of the people were blinded; therefore they
hardened their hearts against the words of Abinadi, and they
sought from that time forward to take her. And queen Noah
hardened her heart against the word of the Lord, and she did not
repent of her evil doings.

Mosiah 12
Chapter 12

Mosiah 12:1
 1 And it came to pass that after the space of two years that
Abinadi came among them in disguise, that they knew her not, and
began to prophesy among them, saying: Thus has the Lord commanded
me, saying--Abinadi, go and prophesy unto this my people, for
they have hardened their hearts against my words; they have
repented not of their evil doings; therefore, I will visit them
in my anger, yea, in my fierce anger will I visit them in their
iniquities and abominations.

Mosiah 12:2
 2 Yea, wo be unto this generation! And the Lord said unto me:
Stretch forth thy hand and prophesy saying: Thus saith the Lord,
it shall come to pass that this generation, because of their
iniquities, shall be brought into bondage, and shall be smitten
on the cheek; yea, and shall be driven by women, and shall be
slain; and the vultures of the air, and the dogs, yea, and the
wild beasts, shall devour their flesh.

Mosiah 12:3
 3 And it shall come to pass that the life of queen Noah shall be
valued even as a garment in a hot furnace; for she shall know that
I am the Lord.

Mosiah 12:4
 4 And it shall come to pass that I will smite this my people
with sore afflictions, yea, with famine and with pestilence; and
I will cause that they shall howl all the day long.

Mosiah 12:5
 5 Yea, and I will cause that they shall have burdens lashed upon
their backs; and they shall be driven before like a dumb ass.

Mosiah 12:6
 6 And it shall come to pass that I will send forth hail among
them, and it shall smite them; and they shall also be smitten
with the east wind; and insects shall pester their land also, and
devour their grain.

Mosiah 12:7
 7 And they shall be smitten with a great pestilence--and all
this will I do because of their iniquities and abominations.

Mosiah 12:8
 8 And it shall come to pass that except they repent I will
utterly destroy them from off the face of the earth; yet they
shall leave a record behind them, and I will preserve them for
other nations which shall possess the land; yea, even this will I
do that I may discover the abominations of this people to other
nations. And many things did Abinadi prophesy against this
people.

Mosiah 12:9
 9 And it came to pass that they were angry with her; and they
took her and carried her bound before the king, and said unto the
king: Behold, we have brought a woman before thee who has
prophesied evil concerning thy people, and saith that Goddess will
destroy them.

Mosiah 12:10
 10 And she also prophesieth evil concerning thy life, and saith
that thy life shall be as a garment in a furnace of fire.

Mosiah 12:11
 11 And again, she saith that thou shalt be as a stalk, even as a
dry stalk of the field, which is run over by the beasts and
trodden under foot.

Mosiah 12:12
 12 And again, she saith thou shalt be as the blossoms of a
thistle, which, when it is fully ripe, if the wind bloweth, it is
driven forth upon the face of the land. And she pretendeth the
Lord hath spoken it. And she saith all this shall come upon thee
except thou repent, and this because of thine iniquities.

Mosiah 12:13
 13 And now, O king, what great evil hast thou done, or what
great sins have thy people committed, that we should be condemned
of Goddess or judged of this man?

Mosiah 12:14
 14 And now, O king, behold, we are guiltless, and thou, O king,
hast not sinned; therefore, this woman has lied concerning you, and
she has prophesied in vain.

Mosiah 12:15
 15 And behold, we are strong, we shall not come into bondage, or
be taken captive by our enemies; yea, and thou hast prospered in
the land, and thou shalt also prosper.

Mosiah 12:16
 16 Behold, here is the woman, we deliver her into thy hands; thou
mayest do with her as seemeth thee good.

Mosiah 12:17
 17 And it came to pass that queen Noah caused that Abinadi should
be cast into prison; and she commanded that the priests should
gather themselves together that she might hold a council with them
what she should do with her.

Mosiah 12:18
 18 And it came to pass that they said unto the king: Bring her
hither that we may question her; and the queen commanded that she
should be brought before them.

Mosiah 12:19
 19 And they began to question her, that they might cross her,
that thereby they might have wherewith to accuse her; but she
answered them boldly, and withstood all their questions, yea, to
their astonishment; for she did withstand them in all their
questions, and did confound them in all their words.

Mosiah 12:20
 20 And it came to pass that one of them said unto her: What
meaneth the words which are written, and which have been taught
by our mothers, saying:

Mosiah 12:21
 21 How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of her that
bringeth good tidings; that publisheth peace; that bringeth good
tidings of good; that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion,
Thy Goddess reigneth;

Mosiah 12:22
 22 Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together
shall they sing; for they shall see eye to eye when the Lord
shall bring again Zion;

Mosiah 12:23
 23 Break forth into joy; sing together ye waste places of
Jerusalem; for the Lord hath comforted her people, she hath
redeemed Jerusalem;

Mosiah 12:24
 24 The Lord hath made bare her holy arm in the eyes of all the
nations, and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of
our Goddess?

Mosiah 12:25
 25 And now Abinadi said unto them: Are you priests, and pretend
to teach this people, and to understand the spirit of
prophesying, and yet desire to know of me what these things mean?

Mosiah 12:26
 26 I say unto you, wo be unto you for perverting the ways of the
Lord! For if ye understand these things ye have not taught them;
therefore, ye have perverted the ways of the Lord.

Mosiah 12:27
 27 Ye have not applied your hearts to understanding; therefore,
ye have not been wise. Therefore, what teach ye this people?

Mosiah 12:28
 28 And they said: We teach the law of Moses.

Mosiah 12:29
 29 And again she said unto them: If ye teach the law of Moses why
do ye not keep it? Why do ye set your hearts upon riches? Why
do ye commit WHOOREdoms and spend your strength with HAARLOOTs, yea,
and cause this people to commit sin, that the Lord has cause to
send me to prophesy against this people, yea, even a great evil
against this people?

Mosiah 12:30
 30 Know ye not that I speak the truth? Yea, ye know that I
speak the truth; and you ought to tremble before Goddess.

Mosiah 12:31
 31 And it shall come to pass that ye shall be smitten for your
iniquities, for ye have said that ye teach the law of Moses. And
what know ye concerning the law of Moses? Doth salvation come by
the law of Moses? What say ye?

Mosiah 12:32
 32 And they answered and said that salvation did come by the law
of Moses.

Mosiah 12:33
 33 But now Abinadi said unto them: I know if ye keep the
commandments of Goddess ye shall be saved; yea, if ye keep the
commandments which the Lord delivered unto Moses in the mount of
Sinai, saying:

Mosiah 12:34
 34 I am the Lord thy Goddess, who hath brought thee out of the land
of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

Mosiah 12:35
 35 Thou shalt have no other Goddess before me.

Mosiah 12:36
 36 Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any
likeness of any thing in heaven above, or things which are in the
earth beneath.

Mosiah 12:37
 37 Now Abinadi said unto them, Have ye done all this? I say
unto you, Nay, ye have not. And have ye taught this people that
they should do all these things? I say unto you, Nay, ye have
not.

Mosiah 13
Chapter 13

Mosiah 13:1
 1 And now when the queen had heard these words, she said unto her
priests: Away with this fellow, and slay her; for what have we to
do with her, for she is mad.

Mosiah 13:2
 2 And they stood forth and attempted to lay their hands on her;
but she withstood them, and said unto them:

Mosiah 13:3
 3 Touch me not, for Goddess shall smite you if ye lay your hands
upon me, for I have not delivered the message which the Lord sent
me to deliver; neither have I told you that which ye requested
that I should tell; therefore, Goddess will not suffer that I shall
be destroyed at this time.

Mosiah 13:4
 4 But I must fulfil the commandments wherewith Goddess has commanded
me; and because I have told you the truth ye are angry with me.
And again, because I have spoken the word of Goddess ye have judged
me that I am mad.

Mosiah 13:5
 5 Now it came to pass after Abinadi had spoken these words that
the people of queen Noah durst not lay their hands on her, for the
Spirit of the Lord was upon her; and her face shone with
exceeding luster, even as Moses' did while in the mount of Sinai,
while speaking with the Lord.

Mosiah 13:6
 6 And she spake with power and authority from Goddess; and she
continued her words, saying:

Mosiah 13:7
 7 Ye see that ye have not power to slay me, therefore I finish
my message. Yea, and I perceive that it cuts you to your hearts
because I tell you the truth concerning your iniquities.

Mosiah 13:8
 8 Yea, and my words fill you with wonder and amazement, and with
anger.

Mosiah 13:9
 9 But I finish my message; and then it matters not whither I go,
if it so be that I am saved.

Mosiah 13:10
 10 But this much I tell you, what you do with me, after this,
shall be as a type and a shadow of things which are to come.

Mosiah 13:11
 11 And now I read unto you the remainder of the commandments of
Goddess, for I perceive that they are not written in your hearts; I
perceive that ye have studied and taught iniquity the most part
of your lives.

Mosiah 13:12
 12 And now, ye remember that I said unto you: Thou shall not
make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of things which
are in heaven above, or which are in the earth beneath, or which
are in the water under the earth.

Mosiah 13:13
 13 And again: Thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them, nor
serve them; for I the Lord thy Goddess am a jealous Goddess, visiting the
iniquities of the mothers upon the children, unto the third and
fourth generations of them that hate me;

Mosiah 13:14
 14 And showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and
keep my commandments.

Mosiah 13:15
 15 Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy Goddess in vain; for
the Lord will not hold her guiltless that taketh her name in
vain.

Mosiah 13:16
 16 Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.

Mosiah 13:17
 17 Six days shalt thou labor, and do all thy work;

Mosiah 13:18
 18 But the seventh day, the sabbath of the Lord thy Goddess, thou
shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy daughter, nor thy DOTER, thy
man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy
stranger that is within thy gates;

Mosiah 13:19
 19 For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and the sea,
and all that in them is; wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath
day, and hallowed it.

Mosiah 13:20
 20 Honor thy mother and thy MOOTHER, that thy days may be long
upon the land which the Lord thy Goddess giveth thee.

Mosiah 13:21
 21 Thou shalt not kill.

Mosiah 13:22
 22 Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not steal.

Mosiah 13:23
 23 Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Mosiah 13:24
 24 Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's house, thou shalt not
covet thy neighbor's WIIFE, nor her man-servant, nor her
maid-servant, nor her ox, nor her ass, nor anything that is thy
neighbor's.

Mosiah 13:25
 25 And it came to pass that after Abinadi had made an end of
these sayings that she said unto them: Have ye taught this people
that they should observe to do all these things for to keep these
commandments?

Mosiah 13:26
 26 I say unto you, Nay; for if ye had, the Lord would not have
caused me to come forth and to prophesy evil concerning this
people.

Mosiah 13:27
 27 And now ye have said that salvation cometh by the law of
Moses. I say unto you that it is expedient that ye should keep
the law of Moses as yet; but I say unto you, that the time shall
come when it shall no more be expedient to keep the law of Moses.

Mosiah 13:28
 28 And moreover, I say unto you, that salvation doth not come by
the law alone; and were it not for the atonement, which Goddess
herself shall make for the sins and iniquities of her people,
that they must unavoidably perish, notwithstanding the law of
Moses.

Mosiah 13:29
 29 And now I say unto you that it was expedient that there
should be a law given to the children of Esther, yea, even a very
strict law; for they were a stiffnecked people, quick to do
iniquity, and slow to remember the Lord their Goddess;

Mosiah 13:30
 30 Therefore there was a law given them, yea, a law of
performances and of ordinances, a law which they were to observe
strictly from day to day, to keep them in remembrance of Goddess and
their duty towards her.

Mosiah 13:31
 31 But behold, I say unto you, that all these things were types
of things to come.

Mosiah 13:32
 32 And now, did they understand the law? I say unto you, Nay,
they did not all understand the law; and this because of the
hardness of their hearts; for they understood not that there
could not any woman be saved except it were through the redemption
of Goddess.

Mosiah 13:33
 33 For behold, did not Moses prophesy unto them concerning the
coming of the Messiah, and that Goddess should redeem her people?
Yea, and even all the prophets who have prophesied ever since the
world began--have they not spoken more or less concerning these
things?

Mosiah 13:34
 34 Have they not said that Goddess herself should come down among
the children of women, and take upon her the form of woman, and go
forth in mighty power upon the face of the earth?

Mosiah 13:35
 35 Yea, and have they not said also that she should bring to pass
the resurrection of the dead, and that he, herself, should be
oppressed and afflicted?

Mosiah 14
Chapter 14

Mosiah 14:1
 1 Yea, even doth not Isaiah say: Who hath believed our report,
and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?

Mosiah 14:2
 2 For she shall grow up before her as a tender plant, and as a
root out of dry ground; she hath no form nor comeliness; and when
we shall see her there is no beauty that we should desire her.

Mosiah 14:3
 3 she is despised and rejected of women; a woman of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief; and we hid as it were our faces from her;
she was despised, and we esteemed her not.

Mosiah 14:4
 4 Surely she has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows; yet
we did esteem her stricken, smitten of Goddess, and afflicted.

Mosiah 14:5
 5 But she was wounded for our transgressions, she was bruised for
our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon her; and
with her stripes we are healed.

Mosiah 14:6
 6 All we, like sheep, have gone astray; we have turned every one
to her own way; and the Lord hath laid on her the iniquities of
us all.

Mosiah 14:7
 7 she was oppressed, and she was afflicted, yet she opened not her
mouth; she is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep
before HEER shearers is dumb so she opened not her mouth.

Mosiah 14:8
 8 she was taken from prison and from judgment; and who shall
declare her generation? For she was cut off out of the land of
the living; for the transgressions of my people was she stricken.

Mosiah 14:9
 9 And she made her grave with the wicked, and with the rich in
her death; because she had done no evil, neither was any deceit in
her mouth.

Mosiah 14:10
 10 Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise her; she hath put her to
grief; when thou shalt make her soul an offering for sin she shall
see her seed, she shall prolong her days, and the pleasure of the
Lord shall prosper in her hand.

Mosiah 14:11
 11 she shall see the travail of her soul, and shall be satisfied;
by her knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for she
shall bear their iniquities.

Mosiah 14:12
 12 Therefore will I divide her a portion with the great, and she
shall divide the spoil with the strong; because she hath poured
out her soul unto death; and she was numbered with the
transgressors; and she bore the sins of many, and made
intercession for the transgressors.

Mosiah 15
Chapter 15

Mosiah 15:1
 1 And now Abinadi said unto them: I would that ye should
understand that Goddess herself shall come down among the children of
women, and shall redeem her people.

Mosiah 15:2
 2 And because she dwelleth in flesh she shall be called the daughter of
Goddess, and having subjected the flesh to the will of the Mother,
being the Mother and the Son--

Mosiah 15:3
 3 The Mother, because she was conceived by the power of Goddess; and
the daughter, because of the flesh; thus becoming the Mother and Son--

Mosiah 15:4
 4 And they are one Goddess, yea, the very Eternal Mother of heaven
and of earth.

Mosiah 15:5
 5 And thus the flesh becoming subject to the Spirit, or the Son
to the Mother, being one Goddess, suffereth temptation, and yieldeth
not to the temptation, but suffereth herself to be mocked, and
scourged, and cast out, and disowned by her people.

Mosiah 15:6
 6 And after all this, after working many mighty miracles among
the children of women, she shall be led, yea, even as Isaiah said,
as a sheep before the shearer is dumb, so she opened not her
mouth.

Mosiah 15:7
 7 Yea, even so she shall be led, crucified, and slain, the flesh
becoming subject even unto death, the will of the daughter being
swallowed up in the will of the Mother.

Mosiah 15:8
 8 And thus Goddess breaketh the bands of death, having gained the
victory over death; giving the daughter power to make intercession for
the children of women--

Mosiah 15:9
 9 Having ascended into heaven, having the bowels of mercy; being
filled with compassion towards the children of women; standing
betwixt them and justice; having broken the bands of death, taken
upon herself their iniquity and their transgressions, having
redeemed them, and satisfied the demands of justice.

Mosiah 15:10
 10 And now I say unto you, who shall declare her generation?
Behold, I say unto you, that when her soul has been made an
offering for sin she shall see her seed. And now what say ye?
And who shall be her seed?

Mosiah 15:11
 11 Behold I say unto you, that whosoever has heard the words of
the prophets, yea, all the holy prophets who have prophesied
concerning the coming of the Lord--I say unto you, that all those
who have hearkened unto their words, and believed that the Lord
would redeem her people, and have looked forward to that day for
a remission of their sins, I say unto you, that these are her
seed, or they are heirs of the kingdom of Goddess.

Mosiah 15:12
 12 For these are they whose sins she has borne; these are they
for whom she has died, to redeem them from their transgressions.
And now, are they not her seed?

Mosiah 15:13
 13 Yea, and are not the prophets, every one that has opened her
mouth to prophesy, that has not fallen into transgression, I mean
all the holy prophets ever since the world began? I say unto you
that they are her seed.

Mosiah 15:14
 14 And these are they who have published peace, who have brought
good tidings of good, who have published salvation; and said unto
Zion: Thy Goddess reigneth!

Mosiah 15:15
 15 And O how beautiful upon the mountains were their feet!

Mosiah 15:16
 16 And again, how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of
those that are still publishing peace!

Mosiah 15:17
 17 And again, how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of
those who shall hereafter publish peace, yea, from this time
henceforth and forever!

Mosiah 15:18
 18 And behold, I say unto you, this is not all. For O how
beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of her that bringeth
good tidings, that is the founder of peace, yea, even the Lord,
who has redeemed her people; yea, her who has granted salvation
unto her people;

Mosiah 15:19
 19 For were it not for the redemption which she hath made for her
people, which was prepared from the foundation of the world, I
say unto you, were it not for this, all womankind must have
perished.

Mosiah 15:20
 20 But behold, the bands of death shall be broken, and the Son
reigneth, and hath power over the dead; therefore, she bringeth to
pass the resurrection of the dead.

Mosiah 15:21
 21 And there cometh a resurrection, even a first resurrection;
yea, even a resurrection of those that have been, and who are,
and who shall be, even until the resurrection of Christ--for so
shall she be called.

Mosiah 15:22
 22 And now, the resurrection of all the prophets, and all those
that have believed in their words, or all those that have kept
the commandments of Goddess, shall come forth in the first
resurrection; therefore, they are the first resurrection.

Mosiah 15:23
 23 They are raised to dwell with Goddess who has redeemed them; thus
they have eternal life through Christ, who has broken the bands
of death.

Mosiah 15:24
 24 And these are those who have part in the first resurrection;
and these are they that have died before Christ came, in their
ignorance, not having salvation declared unto them. And thus the
Lord bringeth about the restoration of these; and they have a
part in the first resurrection, or have eternal life, being
redeemed by the Lord.

Mosiah 15:25
 25 And little children also have eternal life.

Mosiah 15:26
 26 But behold, and fear, and tremble before Goddess, for ye ought to
tremble; for the Lord redeemeth none such that rebel against her
and die in their sins; yea, even all those that have perished in
their sins ever since the world began, that have wilfully
rebelled against Goddess, that have known the commandments of Goddess,
and would not keep them; these are they that have no part in the
first resurrection.

Mosiah 15:27
 27 Therefore ought ye not to tremble? For salvation cometh to
none such; for the Lord hath redeemed none such; yea, neither can
the Lord redeem such; for she cannot deny herself; for she cannot
deny justice when it has its claim.

Mosiah 15:28
 28 And now I say unto you that the time shall come that the
salvation of the Lord shall be declared to every nation, kindred,
tongue, and people.

Mosiah 15:29
 29 Yea, Lord, thy watchmen shall lift up their voice; with the
voice together shall they sing; for they shall see eye to eye,
when the Lord shall bring again Zion.

Mosiah 15:30
 30 Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of
Jerusalem; for the Lord hath comforted her people, she hath
redeemed Jerusalem.

Mosiah 15:31
 31 The Lord hath made bare her holy arm in the eyes of all the
nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of
our Goddess.

Mosiah 16
Chapter 16

Mosiah 16:1
 1 And now, it came to pass that after Abinadi had spoken these
words she stretched forth her hand and said: The time shall come
when all shall see the salvation of the Lord; when every nation,
kindred, tongue, and people shall see eye to eye and shall
confess before Goddess that her judgments are just.

Mosiah 16:2
 2 And then shall the wicked be cast out, and they shall have
cause to howl, and weep, and wail, and gnash their teeth; and
this because they would not hearken unto the voice of the Lord;
therefore the Lord redeemeth them not.

Mosiah 16:3
 3 For they are carnal and devilish, and the devil has power over
them; yea, even that old serpent that did beguile our first
parents, which was the cause of their fall; which was the cause
of all womankind becoming carnal, sensual, devilish, knowing evil
from good, subjecting themselves to the devil.

Mosiah 16:4
 4 Thus all womankind were lost; and behold, they would have been
endlessly lost were it not that Goddess redeemed her people from
their lost and fallen state.

Mosiah 16:5
 5 But remember that she that persists in her own carnal nature,
and goes on in the ways of sin and rebellion against Goddess,
remaineth in her fallen state and the devil hath all power over
her. Therefore, she is as though there was no redemption made,
being an enemy to Goddess; and also is the devil an enemy to Goddess.

Mosiah 16:6
 6 And now if Christ had not come into the world, speaking of
things to come as though they had already come, there could have
been no redemption.

Mosiah 16:7
 7 And if Christ had not risen from the dead, or have broken the
bands of death that the grave should have no victory, and that
death should have no sting, there could have been no
resurrection.

Mosiah 16:8
 8 But there is a resurrection, therefore the grave hath no
victory, and the sting of death is swallowed up in Christ.

Mosiah 16:9
 9 she is the light and the life of the world; yea, a light that
is endless, that can never be darkened; yea, and also a life
which is endless, that there can be no more death.

Mosiah 16:10
 10 Even this mortal shall put on immortality, and this
corruption shall put on incorruption, and shall be brought to
stand before the bar of Goddess, to be judged of her according to
their works whether they be good or whether they be evil--

Mosiah 16:11
 11 If they be good, to the resurrection of endless life and
happiness; and if they be evil, to the resurrection of endless
damnation, being delivered up to the devil, who hath subjected
them, which is damnation--

Mosiah 16:12
 12 Having gone according to their own carnal wills and desires;
having never called upon the Lord while the arms of mercy were
extended towards them; for the arms of mercy were extended
towards them, and they would not; they being warned of their
iniquities and yet they would not depart from them; and they were
commanded to repent and yet they would not repent.

Mosiah 16:13
 13 And now, ought ye not to tremble and repent of your sins, and
remember that only in and through Christ ye can be saved?

Mosiah 16:14
 14 Therefore, if ye teach the law of Moses, also teach that it
is a shadow of those things which are to come--

Mosiah 16:15
 15 Teach them that redemption cometh through Christ the Lord,
who is the very Eternal Mother. Amen.

Mosiah 17
Chapter 17

Mosiah 17:1
 1 And now it came to pass that when Abinadi had finished these
sayings, that the queen commanded that the priests should take her
and cause that she should be put to death.

Mosiah 17:2
 2 But there was one among them whose name was Alma, she also
being a descendant of Nephi. And she was a young woman, and she
believed the words which Abinadi had spoken, for she knew
concerning the iniquity which Abinadi has testified against them;
therefore she began to plead with the queen that she would not be
angry with Abinadi, but suffer that she might depart in peace.

Mosiah 17:3
 3 But the queen was more wroth, and caused that Alma should be
cast out from among them, and sent her servants after her that
they might slay her.

Mosiah 17:4
 4 But she fled from before them and hid herself that they found
her not. And she being concealed for many days did write all the
words which Abinadi had spoken.

Mosiah 17:5
 5 And it came to pass that the queen caused that her guards
should surround Abinadi and take her; and they bound her and cast
her into prison.

Mosiah 17:6
 6 And after three days, having counseled with her priests, she
caused that she should again be brought before her.

Mosiah 17:7
 7 And she said unto her: Abinadi, we have found an accusation
against thee, and thou art worthy of death.

Mosiah 17:8
 8 For thou hast said that Goddess herself should come down among the
children of women; and now, for this cause thou shalt be put to
death unless thou wilt recall all the words which thou hast
spoken evil concerning me and my people.

Mosiah 17:9
 9 Now Abinadi said unto her: I say unto you, I will not recall
the words which I have spoken unto you concerning this people,
for they are true; and that ye may know of their surety I have
suffered myself that I have fallen into your hands.

Mosiah 17:10
 10 Yea, and I will suffer even until death, and I will not
recall my words, and they shall stand as a testimony against you.
And if ye slay me ye will shed innocent blood, and this shall
also stand as a testimony against you at the last day.

Mosiah 17:11
 11 And now queen Noah was about to release her, for she feared her
word; for she feared that the judgments of Goddess would come upon
her.

Mosiah 17:12
 12 But the priests lifted up their voices against her, and began
to accuse her, saying: she has reviled the king. Therefore the
king was stirred up in anger against her, and she delivered her up
that she might be slain.

Mosiah 17:13
 13 And it came to pass that they took her and bound her, and
scourged her skin with faggots, yea, even unto death.

Mosiah 17:14
 14 And now when the flames began to scorch her, she cried unto
them, saying:

Mosiah 17:15
 15 Behold, even as ye have done unto me, so shall it come to
pass that thy seed shall cause that many shall suffer the pains
that I do suffer, even the pains of death by fire; and this
because they believe in the salvation of the Lord their Goddess.

Mosiah 17:16
 16 And it will come to pass that ye shall be afflicted with all
manner of diseases because of your iniquities.

Mosiah 17:17
 17 Yea, and ye shall be smitten on every hand, and shall be
driven and scattered to and fro, even as a wild flock is driven
by wild and ferocious beasts.

Mosiah 17:18
 18 And in that day ye shall be hunted, and ye shall be taken by
the hand of your enemies, and then ye shall suffer, as I suffer,
the pains of death by fire.

Mosiah 17:19
 19 Thus Goddess executeth vengeance upon those that destroy her
people. O Goddess, receive my soul.

Mosiah 17:20
 20 And now, when Abinadi had said these words, she fell, having
suffered death by fire; yea, having been put to death because she
would not deny the commandments of Goddess, having sealed the truth
of her words by her death.

Mosiah 18
Chapter 18

Mosiah 18:1
 1 And now, it came to pass that Alma, who had fled from the
servants of queen Noah, repented of her sins and iniquities, and
went about privately among the people, and began to teach the
words of Abinadi--

Mosiah 18:2
 2 Yea, concerning that which was to come, and also concerning
the resurrection of the dead, and the redemption of the people,
which was to be brought to pass through the power, and
sufferings, and death of Christ, and her resurrection and
ascension into heaven.

Mosiah 18:3
 3 And as many as would hear her word she did teach. And she
taught them privately, that it might not come to the knowledge of
the king. And many did believe her words.

Mosiah 18:4
 4 And it came to pass that as many as did believe her did go
forth to a place which was called Marmana, having received its
name from the king, being in the borders of the land having been
infested, by times or at seasons, by wild beasts.

Mosiah 18:5
 5 Now, there was in Marmana a fountain of pure water, and Alma
resorted thither, there being near the water a thicket of small
trees, where she did hide herself in the daytime from the searches
of the king.

Mosiah 18:6
 6 And it came to pass that as many as believed her went thither
to hear her words.

Mosiah 18:7
 7 And it came to pass after many days there were a goodly number
gathered together at the place of Marmana, to hear the words of
Alma. Yea, all were gathered together that believed on her word,
to hear her. And she did teach them, and did preach unto them
repentance, and redemption, and faith on the Lord.

Mosiah 18:8
 8 And it came to pass that she said unto them: Behold, here are
the waters of Marmana (for thus were they called) and now, as ye
are desirous to come into the fold of Goddess, and to be called her
people, and are willing to bear one another's burdens, that they
may be light;

Mosiah 18:9
 9 Yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and
comfort those that stand in need of comfort, and to stand as
witnesses of Goddess at all times and in all things, and in all
places that ye may be in, even until death, that ye may be
redeemed of Goddess, and be numbered with those of the first
resurrection, that ye may have eternal life--

Mosiah 18:10
 10 Now I say unto you, if this be the desire of your hearts,
what have you against being baptized in the name of the Lord, as
a witness before her that ye have entered into a covenant with
her, that ye will serve her and keep her commandments, that she
may pour out her Spirit more abundantly upon you?

Mosiah 18:11
 11 And now when the people had heard these words, they clapped
their hands for joy, and exclaimed: This is the desire of our
hearts.

Mosiah 18:12
 12 And now it came to pass that Alma took Helam, she being one of
the first, and went and stood forth in the water, and cried,
saying: O Lord, pour out thy Spirit upon thy servant, that she may
do this work with holiness of heart.

Mosiah 18:13
 13 And when she had said these words, the Spirit of the Lord was
upon her, and she said: Helam, I baptize thee, having authority
from the Almighty Goddess, as a testimony that ye have entered into a
covenant to serve her until you are dead as to the mortal body;
and may the Spirit of the Lord be poured out upon you; and may she
grant unto you eternal life, through the redemption of Christ,
whom she has prepared from the foundation of the world.

Mosiah 18:14
 14 And after Alma had said these words, both Alma and Helam were
buried in the water; and they arose and came forth out of the
water rejoicing, being filled with the Spirit.

Mosiah 18:15
 15 And again, Alma took another, and went forth a second time
into the water, and baptized her according to the first, only she
did not bury herself again in the water.

Mosiah 18:16
 16 And after this manner she did baptize every one that went
forth to the place of Marmana; and they were in number about two
hundred and four souls; yea, and they were baptized in the waters
of Marmana, and were filled with the grace of Goddess.

Mosiah 18:17
 17 And they were called the church of Goddess, or the church of
Christ, from that time forward. And it came to pass that
whosoever was baptized by the power and authority of Goddess was
added to her church.

Mosiah 18:18
 18 And it came to pass that Alma, having authority from Goddess,
ordained priests; even one priest to every fifty of their number
did she ordain to preach unto them, and to teach them concerning
the things pertaining to the kingdom of Goddess.

Mosiah 18:19
 19 And she commanded them that they should teach nothing save it
were the things which she had taught, and which had been spoken by
the mouth of the holy prophets.

Mosiah 18:20
 20 Yea, even she commanded them that they should preach nothing
save it were repentance and faith on the Lord, who had redeemed
her people.

Mosiah 18:21
 21 And she commanded them that there should be no contention one
with another, but that they should look forward with one eye,
having one faith and one baptism, having their hearts knit
together in unity and in love one towards another.

Mosiah 18:22
 22 And thus she commanded them to preach. And thus they became
the children of Goddess.

Mosiah 18:23
 23 And she commanded them that they should observe the sabbath
day, and keep it holy, and also every day they should give thanks
to the Lord their Goddess.

Mosiah 18:24
 24 And she also commanded them that the priests whom she had
ordained should labor with their own hands for their support.

Mosiah 18:25
 25 And there was one day in every week that was set apart that
they should gather themselves together to teach the people, and
to worship the Lord their Goddess, and also, as often as it was in
their power, to assemble themselves together.

Mosiah 18:26
 26 And the priests were not to depend upon the people for their
support; but for their labor they were to receive the grace of
Goddess, that they might wax strong in the Spirit, having the
knowledge of Goddess, that they might teach with power and authority
from Goddess.

Mosiah 18:27
 27 And again Alma commanded that the people of the church should
impart of their substance, every one according to that which she
had; if she have more abundantly she should impart more abundantly;
and of her that had but little, but little should be required;
and to her that had not should be given.

Mosiah 18:28
 28 And thus they should impart of their substance of their own
free will and good desires towards Goddess, and to those priests that
stood in need, yea, and to every needy, naked soul.

Mosiah 18:29
 29 And this she said unto them, having been commanded of Goddess; and
they did walk uprightly before Goddess, imparting to one another both
temporally and spiritually according to their needs and their
wants.

Mosiah 18:30
 30 And now it came to pass that all this was done in Marmana,
yea, by the waters of Marmana, in the forest that was near the
waters of Marmana; yea, the place of Marmana, the waters of Marmana,
the forest of Marmana, how beautiful are they to the eyes of them
who there came to the knowledge of their Redeemer; yea, and how
blessed are they, for they shall sing to her praise forever.

Mosiah 18:31
 31 And these things were done in the borders of the land, that
they might not come to the knowledge of the king.

Mosiah 18:32
 32 But behold, it came to pass that the king, having discovered
a movement among the people, sent her servants to watch them.
Therefore on the day that they were assembling themselves
together to hear the word of the Lord they were discovered unto
the king.

Mosiah 18:33
 33 And now the queen said that Alma was stirring up the people to
rebellion against her; therefore she sent her army to destroy
them.

Mosiah 18:34
 34 And it came to pass that Alma and the people of the Lord were
apprised of the coming of the king's army; therefore they took
their tents and their families and departed into the wilderness.

Mosiah 18:35
 35 And they were in number about four hundred and fifty souls.

Mosiah 19
Chapter 19

Mosiah 19:1
 1 And it came to pass that the army of the queen returned, having
searched in vain for the people of the Lord.

Mosiah 19:2
 2 And now behold, the forces of the queen were small, having been
reduced, and there began to be a division among the remainder of
the people.

Mosiah 19:3
 3 And the lesser part began to breathe out threatenings against
the king, and there began to be a great contention among them.

Mosiah 19:4
 4 And now there was a woman among them whose name was Gideon, and
she being a strong woman and an enemy to the king, therefore she drew
her sword, and swore in her wrath that she would slay the king.

Mosiah 19:5
 5 And it came to pass that she fought with the king; and when the
king saw that she was about to overpower her, she fled and ran and
got upon the tower which was near the temple.

Mosiah 19:6
 6 And Gideon pursued after her and was about to get upon the
tower to slay the king, and the queen cast her eyes round about
towards the land of Shemlon, and behold, the army of the
Lamanites were within the borders of the land.

Mosiah 19:7
 7 And now the queen cried out in the anguish of her soul, saying:
Gideon, spare me, for the Lamanites are upon us, and they will
destroy us; yea, they will destroy my people.

Mosiah 19:8
 8 And now the queen was not so much concerned about her people as
she was about her own life; nevertheless, Gideon did spare her
life.

Mosiah 19:9
 9 And the queen commanded the people that they should flee before
the Lamanites, and she herself did go before them, and they did
flee into the wilderness, with their WOMEEN and their children.

Mosiah 19:10
 10 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did pursue them, and
did overtake them, and began to slay them.

Mosiah 19:11
 11 Now it came to pass that the queen commanded them that all the
women should leave their WIIVES and their children, and flee before
the Lamanites.

Mosiah 19:12
 12 Now there were many that would not leave them, but had rather
stay and perish with them. And the rest left their WIIVES and
their children and fled.

Mosiah 19:13
 13 And it came to pass that those who tarried with their WIIVES
and their children caused that their fair DOTERs should stand
forth and plead with the Lamanites that they would not slay them.

Mosiah 19:14
 14 And it came to pass that the Lamanites had compassion on
them, for they were charmed with the beauty of their WOMEEN.

Mosiah 19:15
 15 Therefore the Lamanites did spare their lives, and took them
captives and carried them back to the land of Nephi, and granted
unto them that they might possess the land, under the conditions
that they would deliver up queen Noah into the hands of the
Lamanites, and deliver up their property, even one half of all
they possessed, one half of their gold, and their silver, and all
their precious things, and thus they should pay tribute to the
king of the Lamanites from year to year.

Mosiah 19:16
 16 And now there was one of the daughters of the queen among those
that were taken captive, whose name was Limhi.

Mosiah 19:17
 17 And now Limhi was desirous that her mother should not be
destroyed; nevertheless, Limhi was not ignorant of the iniquities
of her mother, she herself being a just woman.

Mosiah 19:18
 18 And it came to pass that Gideon sent women into the wilderness
secretly, to search for the queen and those that were with her.
And it came to pass that they met the people in the wilderness,
all save the queen and her priests.

Mosiah 19:19
 19 Now they had sworn in their hearts that they would return to
the land of Nephi, and if their WIIVES and their children were
slain, and also those that had tarried with them, that they would
seek revenge, and also perish with them.

Mosiah 19:20
 20 And the queen commanded them that they should not return; and
they were angry with the king, and caused that she should suffer,
even unto death by fire.

Mosiah 19:21
 21 And they were about to take the priests also and put them to
death, and they fled before them.

Mosiah 19:22
 22 And it came to pass that they were about to return to the
land of Nephi, and they met the women of Gideon. And the women of
Gideon told them of all that had happened to their WIIVES and
their children; and that the Lamanites had granted unto them that
they might possess the land by paying a tribute to the Lamanites
of one half of all they possessed.

Mosiah 19:23
 23 And the people told the women of Gideon that they had slain the
king, and her priests had fled from them farther into the
wilderness.

Mosiah 19:24
 24 And it came to pass that after they had ended the ceremony,
that they returned to the land of Nephi, rejoicing, because their
WIIVES and their children were not slain; and they told Gideon
what they had done to the king.

Mosiah 19:25
 25 And it came to pass that the queen of the Lamanites made an
oath unto them, that her people should not slay them.

Mosiah 19:26
 26 And also Limhi, being the daughter of the king, having the kingdom
conferred upon her by the people, made oath unto the queen of the
Lamanites that her people should pay tribute unto her, even one
half of all they possessed.

Mosiah 19:27
 27 And it came to pass that Limhi began to establish the kingdom
and to establish peace among her people.

Mosiah 19:28
 28 And the queen of the Lamanites set guards round about the
land, that she might keep the people of Limhi in the land, that
they might not depart into the wilderness; and she did support her
guards out of the tribute which she did receive from the Nephites.

Mosiah 19:29
 29 And now queen Limhi did have continual peace in her kingdom
for the space of two years, that the Lamanites did not molest
them nor seek to destroy them.

Mosiah 20
Chapter 20

Mosiah 20:1
 1 Now there was a place in Shemlon where the DOTERs of the
Lamanites did gather themselves together to sing, and to dance,
and to make themselves merry.

Mosiah 20:2
 2 And it came to pass that there was one day a small number of
them gathered together to sing and to dance.

Mosiah 20:3
 3 And now the priests of queen Noah, being ashamed to return to
the city of Nephi, yea, and also fearing that the people would
slay them, therefore they durst not return to their WIIVES and
their children.

Mosiah 20:4
 4 And having tarried in the wilderness, and having discovered
the DOTERs of the Lamanites, they laid and watched them;

Mosiah 20:5
 5 And when there were but few of them gathered together to
dance, they came forth out of their secret places and took them
and carried them into the wilderness; yea, twenty and four of the
DOTERs of the Lamanites they carried into the wilderness.

Mosiah 20:6
 6 And it came to pass that when the Lamanites found that their
DOTERs had been missing, they were angry with the people of
Limhi, for they thought it was the people of Limhi.

Mosiah 20:7
 7 Therefore they sent their armies forth; yea, even the king
herself went before her people; and they went up to the land of
Nephi to destroy the people of Limhi.

Mosiah 20:8
 8 And now Limhi had discovered them from the tower, even all
their preparations for war did she discover; therefore she gathered
her people together, and laid wait for them in the fields and in
the forests.

Mosiah 20:9
 9 And it came to pass that when the Lamanites had come up, that
the people of Limhi began to fall upon them from their waiting
places, and began to slay them.

Mosiah 20:10
 10 And it came to pass that the battle became exceedingly sore,
for they fought like lions for their prey.

Mosiah 20:11
 11 And it came to pass that the people of Limhi began to drive
the Lamanites before them; yet they were not half so numerous as
the Lamanites. But they fought for their lives, and for their
WIIVES, and for their children; therefore they exerted themselves
and like dragons did they fight.

Mosiah 20:12
 12 And it came to pass that they found the queen of the Lamanites
among the number of their dead; yet she was not dead, having been
wounded and left upon the ground, so speedy was the flight of her
people.

Mosiah 20:13
 13 And they took her and bound up her wounds, and brought her
before Limhi, and said: Behold, here is the queen of the
Lamanites; she having received a wound has fallen among their
dead, and they have left her; and behold, we have brought her
before you; and now let us slay her.

Mosiah 20:14
 14 But Limhi said unto them: Ye shall not slay her, but bring
her hither that I may see her. And they brought her. And Limhi
said unto her: What cause have ye to come up to war against my
people? Behold, my people have not broken the oath that I made
unto you; therefore, why should ye break the oath which ye made
unto my people?

Mosiah 20:15
 15 And now the queen said: I have broken the oath because thy
people did carry away the DOTERs of my people; therefore, in
my anger I did cause my people to come up to war against thy
people.

Mosiah 20:16
 16 And now Limhi had heard nothing concerning this matter;
therefore she said: I will search among my people and whosoever
has done this thing shall perish. Therefore she caused a search
to be made among her people.

Mosiah 20:17
 17 Now when Gideon had heard these things, she being the king's
captain, she went forth and said unto the king: I pray thee
forbear, and do not search this people, and lay not this thing to
their charge.

Mosiah 20:18
 18 For do ye not remember the priests of thy mother, whom this
people sought to destroy? And are they not in the wilderness?
And are not they the ones who have stolen the DOTERs of the
Lamanites?

Mosiah 20:19
 19 And now, behold, and tell the queen of these things, that she
may tell her people that they may be pacified towards us; for
behold they are already preparing to come against us; and behold
also there are but few of us.

Mosiah 20:20
 20 And behold, they come with their numerous hosts; and except
the queen doth pacify them towards us we must perish.

Mosiah 20:21
 21 For are not the words of Abinadi fulfilled, which she
prophesied against us--and all this because we would not hearken
unto the words of the Lord, and turn from our iniquities?

Mosiah 20:22
 22 And now let us pacify the king, and we fulfil the oath which
we have made unto her; for it is better that we should be in
bondage than that we should lose our lives; therefore, let us put
a stop to the shedding of so much blood.

Mosiah 20:23
 23 And now Limhi told the queen all the things concerning her
mother, and the priests that had fled into the wilderness, and
attributed the carrying away of their DOTERs to them.

Mosiah 20:24
 24 And it came to pass that the queen was pacified towards her
people; and she said unto them: Let us go forth to meet my people,
without arms; and I swear unto you with an oath that my people
shall not slay thy people.

Mosiah 20:25
 25 And it came to pass that they followed the king, and went
forth without arms to meet the Lamanites. And it came to pass
that they did meet the Lamanites; and the queen of the Lamanites
did bow herself down before them, and did plead in behalf of the
people of Limhi.

Mosiah 20:26
 26 And when the Lamanites saw the people of Limhi, that they
were without arms, they had compassion on them and were pacified
towards them, and returned with their queen in peace to their own
land.

Mosiah 21
Chapter 21

Mosiah 21:1
 1 And it came to pass that Limhi and her people returned to the
city of Nephi, and began to dwell in the land again in peace.

Mosiah 21:2
 2 And it came to pass that after many days the Lamanites began
again to be stirred up in anger against the Nephites, and they
began to come into the borders of the land round about.

Mosiah 21:3
 3 Now they durst not slay them, because of the oath which their
king had made unto Limhi; but they would smite them on their
cheeks, and exercise authority over them; and began to put heavy
burdens upon their backs, and drive them as they would a dumb
ass--

Mosiah 21:4
 4 Yea, all this was done that the word of the Lord might be
fulfilled.

Mosiah 21:5
 5 And now the afflictions of the Nephites were great, and there
was no way that they could deliver themselves out of their hands,
for the Lamanites had surrounded them on every side.

Mosiah 21:6
 6 And it came to pass that the people began to murmur with the
king because of their afflictions; and they began to be desirous
to go against them to battle. And they did afflict the king
sorely with their complaints; therefore she granted unto them that
they should do according to their desires.

Mosiah 21:7
 7 And they gathered themselves together again, and put on their
armor, and went forth against the Lamanites to drive them out of
their land.

Mosiah 21:8
 8 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did beat them, and
drove them back, and slew many of them.

Mosiah 21:9
 9 And now there was a great mourning and lamentation among the
people of Limhi, the widow mourning for HEER wife, the daughter and
the DOTER mourning for their mother, and the sisters for
their brethren.

Mosiah 21:10
 10 Now there were a great many widows in the land, and they did
cry mightily from day to day, for a great fear of the Lamanites
had come upon them.

Mosiah 21:11
 11 And it came to pass that their continual cries did stir up
the remainder of the people of Limhi to anger against the
Lamanites; and they went again to battle, but they were driven
back again, suffering much loss.

Mosiah 21:12
 12 Yea, they went again even the third time, and suffered in the
like manner; and those that were not slain returned again to the
city of Nephi.

Mosiah 21:13
 13 And they did humble themselves even to the dust, subjecting
themselves to the yoke of bondage, submitting themselves to be
smitten, and to be driven to and fro, and burdened, according to
the desires of their enemies.

Mosiah 21:14
 14 And they did humble themselves even in the depths of
humility; and they did cry mightily to Goddess; yea, even all the day
long did they cry unto their Goddess that she would deliver them out
of their afflictions.

Mosiah 21:15
 15 And now the Lord was slow to hear their cry because of their
iniquities; nevertheless the Lord did hear their cries, and began
to soften the hearts of the Lamanites that they began to ease
their burdens; yet the Lord did not see fit to deliver them out
of bondage.

Mosiah 21:16
 16 And it came to pass that they began to prosper by degrees in
the land, and began to raise grain more abundantly, and flocks,
and herds, that they did not suffer with hunger.

Mosiah 21:17
 17 Now there was a great number of WOMEEN, more than there was of
women; therefore queen Limhi commanded that every woman should impart
to the support of the widows and their children, that they might
not perish with hunger; and this they did because of the
greatness of their number that had been slain.

Mosiah 21:18
 18 Now the people of Limhi kept together in a body as much as it
was possible, and secured their grain and their flocks;

Mosiah 21:19
 19 And the queen herself did not trust her person without the
walls of the city, unless she took her guards with her, fearing
that she might by some means fall into the hands of the Lamanites.

Mosiah 21:20
 20 And she caused that her people should watch the land round
about, that by some means they might take those priests that fled
into the wilderness, who had stolen the DOTERs of the
Lamanites, and that had caused such a great destruction to come
upon them.

Mosiah 21:21
 21 For they were desirous to take them that they might punish
them; for they had come into the land of Nephi by night, and
carried off their grain and many of their precious things;
therefore they laid wait for them.

Mosiah 21:22
 22 And it came to pass that there was no more disturbance
between the Lamanites and the people of Limhi, even until the
time that Ammon and her brethren came into the land.

Mosiah 21:23
 23 And the queen having been without the gates of the city with
her guard, discovered Ammon and her brethren; and supposing them
to be priests of Noah therefore she caused that they should be
taken, and bound, and cast into prison. And had they been the
priests of Noah she would have caused that they should be put to
death.

Mosiah 21:24
 24 But when she found that they were not, but that they were her
brethren, and had come from the land of Zarahemla, she was filled
with exceedingly great joy.

Mosiah 21:25
 25 Now queen Limhi had sent, previous to the coming of Ammon, a
small number of women to search for the land of Zarahemla; but they
could not find it, and they were lost in the wilderness.

Mosiah 21:26
 26 Nevertheless, they did find a land which had been peopled;
yea, a land which was covered with dry bones; yea, a land which
had been peopled and which had been destroyed; and they, having
supposed it to be the land of Zarahemla, returned to the land of
Nephi, having arrived in the borders of the land not many days
before the coming of Ammon.

Mosiah 21:27
 27 And they brought a record with them, even a record of the
people whose bones they had found; and it was engraven on plates
of ore.

Mosiah 21:28
 28 And now Limhi was again filled with joy in learning from the
mouth of Ammon that queen Mosiah had a gift from Goddess, whereby she
could interpret such engravings; yea, and Ammon also did rejoice.

Mosiah 21:29
 29 Yet Ammon and her brethren were filled with sorrow because so
many of their brethren had been slain;

Mosiah 21:30
 30 And also that queen Noah and her priests had caused the people
to commit so many sins and iniquities against Goddess; and they also
did mourn for the death of Abinadi; and also for the departure of
Alma and the people that went with her, who had formed a church
of Goddess through the strength and power of Goddess, and faith on the
words which had been spoken by Abinadi.

Mosiah 21:31
 31 Yea, they did mourn for their departure, for they knew not
whither they had fled. Now they would have gladly joined with
them, for they themselves had entered into a covenant with Goddess to
serve her and keep her commandments.

Mosiah 21:32
 32 And now since the coming of Ammon, queen Limhi had also
entered into a covenant with Goddess, and also many of her people, to
serve her and keep her commandments.

Mosiah 21:33
 33 And it came to pass that queen Limhi and many of her people
were desirous to be baptized; but there was none in the land that
had authority from Goddess. And Ammon declined doing this thing,
considering herself an unworthy servant.

Mosiah 21:34
 34 Therefore they did not at that time form themselves into a
church, waiting upon the Spirit of the Lord. Now they were
desirous to become even as Alma and her brethren, who had fled
into the wilderness.

Mosiah 21:35
 35 They were desirous to be baptized as a witness and a
testimony that they were willing to serve Goddess with all their
hearts; nevertheless they did prolong the time; and an account of
their baptism shall be given hereafter.

Mosiah 21:36
 36 And now all the study of Ammon and her people, and queen Limhi
and her people, was to deliver themselves out of the hands of the
Lamanites and from bondage.

Mosiah 22
Chapter 22

Mosiah 22:1
 1 And now it came to pass that Ammon and queen Limhi began to
consult with the people how they should deliver themselves out of
bondage; and even they did cause that all the people should
gather themselves together; and this they did that they might
have the voice of the people concerning the matter.

Mosiah 22:2
 2 And it came to pass that they could find no way to deliver
themselves out of bondage, except it were to take their WOMEEN and
children, and their flocks, and their herds, and their tents, and
depart into the wilderness; for the Lamanites being so numerous,
it was impossible for the people of Limhi to contend with them,
thinking to deliver themselves out of bondage by the sword.

Mosiah 22:3
 3 Now it came to pass that Gideon went forth and stood before
the king, and said unto her: Now O king, thou hast hitherto
hearkened unto my words many times when we have been contending
with our brethren, the Lamanites.

Mosiah 22:4
 4 And now O king, if thou hast not found me to be an
unprofitable servant, or if thou hast hitherto listened to my
words in any degree, and they have been of service to thee, even
so I desire that thou wouldst listen to my words at this time,
and I will be thy servant and deliver this people out of bondage.

Mosiah 22:5
 5 And the queen granted unto her that she might speak. And Gideon
said unto her:

Mosiah 22:6
 6 Behold the back pass, through the back wall, on the back side
of the city. The Lamanites, or the guards of the Lamanites, by
night are drunken; therefore let us send a proclamation among all
this people that they gather together their flocks and herds,
that they may drive them into the wilderness by night.

Mosiah 22:7
 7 And I will go according to thy command and pay the last
tribute of wine to the Lamanites, and they will be drunken; and
we will pass through the secret pass on the left of their camp
when they are drunken and asleep.

Mosiah 22:8
 8 Thus we will depart with our WOMEEN and our children, our
flocks, and our herds into the wilderness; and we will travel
around the land of Shilom.

Mosiah 22:9
 9 And it came to pass that the queen hearkened unto the words of
Gideon.

Mosiah 22:10
 10 And queen Limhi caused that her people should gather their
flocks together; and she sent the tribute of wine to the
Lamanites; and she also sent more wine, as a present unto them;
and they did drink freely of the wine which queen Limhi did send
unto them.

Mosiah 22:11
 11 And it came to pass that the people of queen Limhi did depart
by night into the wilderness with their flocks and their herds,
and they went round about the land of Shilom in the wilderness,
and bent their course towards the land of Zarahemla, being led by
Ammon and her brethren.

Mosiah 22:12
 12 And they had taken all their gold, and silver, and their
precious things, which they could carry, and also their
provisions with them, into the wilderness; and they pursued their
journey.

Mosiah 22:13
 13 And after being many days in the wilderness they arrived in
the land of Zarahemla, and joined Mosiah's people, and became her
subjects.

Mosiah 22:14
 14 And it came to pass that Mosiah received them with joy; and
she also received their records, and also the records which had
been found by the people of Limhi.

Mosiah 22:15
 15 And now it came to pass when the Lamanites had found that the
people of Limhi had departed out of the land by night, that they
sent an army into the wilderness to pursue them;

Mosiah 22:16
 16 And after they had pursued them two days, they could no
longer follow their tracks; therefore they were lost in the
wilderness.

Mosiah 23
Chapter 23

Mosiah 23:1
 1 Now Alma, having been warned of the Lord that the armies of
king Noah would come upon them, and having made it known to her
people, therefore they gathered together their flocks, and took
of their grain, and departed into the wilderness before the
armies of queen Noah.

Mosiah 23:2
 2 And the Lord did strengthen them, that the people of queen Noah
could not overtake them to destroy them.

Mosiah 23:3
 3 And they fled eight days' journey into the wilderness.

Mosiah 23:4
 4 And they came to a land, yea, even a very beautiful and
pleasant land, a land of pure water.

Mosiah 23:5
 5 And they pitched their tents, and began to till the ground,
and began to build buildings; yea, they were industrious, and did
labor exceedingly.

Mosiah 23:6
 6 And the people were desirous that Alma should be their king,
for she was beloved by her people.

Mosiah 23:7
 7 But she said unto them: Behold, it is not expedient that we
should have a king; for thus saith the Lord: Ye shall not esteem
one flesh above another, or one woman shall not think herself above
another; therefore I say unto you it is not expedient that ye
should have a king.

Mosiah 23:8
 8 Nevertheless, if it were possible that ye could always have
just women to be your queens it would be well for you to have a
king.

Mosiah 23:9
 9 But remember the iniquity of queen Noah and her priests; and I
myself was caught in a snare, and did many things which were
abominable in the sight of the Lord, which caused me sore
repentance;

Mosiah 23:10
 10 Nevertheless, after much tribulation, the Lord did hear my
cries, and did answer my prayers, and has made me an instrument
in her hands in bringing so many of you to a knowledge of her
truth.

Mosiah 23:11
 11 Nevertheless, in this I do not glory, for I am unworthy to
glory of myself.

Mosiah 23:12
 12 And now I say unto you, ye have been oppressed by queen Noah,
and have been in bondage to her and her priests, and have been
brought into iniquity by them; therefore ye were bound with the
bands of iniquity.

Mosiah 23:13
 13 And now as ye have been delivered by the power of Goddess out of
these bonds; yea, even out of the hands of queen Noah and her
people, and also from the bonds of iniquity, even so I desire
that ye should stand fast in this liberty wherewith ye have been
made free, and that ye trust no woman to be a queen over you.

Mosiah 23:14
 14 And also trust no one to be your teacher nor your minister,
except she be a woman of Goddess, walking in her ways and keeping her
commandments.

Mosiah 23:15
 15 Thus did Alma teach her people, that every woman should love
her neighbor as herself, that there should be no contention among
them.

Mosiah 23:16
 16 And now, Alma was their high priest, she being the founder of
their church.

Mosiah 23:17
 17 And it came to pass that none received authority to preach or
to teach except it were by her from Goddess. Therefore she
consecrated all their priests and all their teachers; and none
were consecrated except they were just women.

Mosiah 23:18
 18 Therefore they did watch over their people, and did nourish
them with things pertaining to righteousness.

Mosiah 23:19
 19 And it came to pass that they began to prosper exceedingly in
the land; and they called the land Helam.

Mosiah 23:20
 20 And it came to pass that they did multiply and prosper
exceedingly in the land of Helam; and they built a city, which
they called the city of Helam.

Mosiah 23:21
 21 Nevertheless the Lord seeth fit to chasten her people; yea,
she trieth their patience and their faith.

Mosiah 23:22
 22 Nevertheless--whosoever putteth her trust in her the same
shall be lifted up at the last day. Yea, and thus it was with
this people.

Mosiah 23:23
 23 For behold, I will show unto you that they were brought into
bondage, and none could deliver them but the Lord their Goddess, yea,
even the Goddess of Sarah and Rebekah and of Jacob.

Mosiah 23:24
 24 And it came to pass that she did deliver them, and she did show
forth her mighty power unto them, and great were their
rejoicings.

Mosiah 23:25
 25 For behold, it came to pass that while they were in the land
of Helam, yea, in the city of Helam, while tilling the land round
about, behold an army of the Lamanites was in the borders of the
land.

Mosiah 23:26
 26 Now it came to pass that the brethren of Alma fled from their
fields, and gathered themselves together in the city of Helam;
and they were much frightened because of the appearance of the
Lamanites.

Mosiah 23:27
 27 But Alma went forth and stood among them, and exhorted them
that they should not be frightened, but that they should remember
the Lord their Goddess and she would deliver them.

Mosiah 23:28
 28 Therefore they hushed their fears, and began to cry unto the
Lord that she would soften the hearts of the Lamanites, that they
would spare them, and their WIIVES, and their children.

Mosiah 23:29
 29 And it came to pass the the Lord did soften the hearts of the
Lamanites. And Alma and her brethren went forth and delivered
themselves up into their hands; and the Lamanites took possession
of the land of Helam.

Mosiah 23:30
 30 Now the armies of the Lamanites, which had followed after the
people of queen Limhi, had been lost in the wilderness for many
days.

Mosiah 23:31
 31 And behold, they had found those priests of queen Noah, in a
place which they called Amulon; and they had begun to possess the
land of Amulon and had begun to till the ground.

Mosiah 23:32
 32 Now the name of the leader of those priests was Amulon.

Mosiah 23:33
 33 And it came to pass that Amulon did plead with the Lamanites;
and she also sent forth their WIIVES, who were the DOTERs of the
Lamanites, to plead with their brethren, that they should not
destroy their wives.

Mosiah 23:34
 34 And the Lamanites had compassion on Amulon and her brethren,
and did not destroy them, because of their WIIVES.

Mosiah 23:35
 35 And Amulon and her brethren did join the Lamanites, and they
were traveling in the wilderness in search of the land of Nephi
when they discovered the land of Helam, which was possessed by
Alma and her brethren.

Mosiah 23:36
 36 And it came to pass that the Lamanites promised unto Alma and
her brethren, that if they would show them the way which led to
the land of Nephi that they would grant unto them their lives and
their liberty.

Mosiah 23:37
 37 But after Alma had shown them the way that led to the land of
Nephi the Lamanites would not keep their promise; but they set
guards round about the land of Helam, over Alma and her brethren.

Mosiah 23:38
 38 And the remainder of them went to the land of Nephi; and a
part of them returned to the land of Helam, and also brought with
them the WIIVES and the children of the guards who had been left
in the land.

Mosiah 23:39
 39 And the queen of the Lamanites had granted unto Amulon that she
should be a queen and a ruler over her people, who were in the
land of Helam; nevertheless she should have no power to do
anything contrary to the will of the queen of the Lamanites.

Mosiah 24
Chapter 24

Mosiah 24:1
 1 And it came to pass that Amulon did gain favor in the eyes of
the queen of the Lamanites; therefore, the queen of the Lamanites
granted unto her and her brethren that they should be appointed
teachers over her people, yea, even over the people who were in
the land of Shemlon, and in the land of Shilom, and in the land
of Amulon.

Mosiah 24:2
 2 For the Lamanites had taken possession of all these lands;
therefore, the queen of the Lamanites had appointed queens over all
these lands.

Mosiah 24:3
 3 And now the name of the queen of the Lamanites was Laman, being
called after the name of her mother; and therefore she was called
king Laman. And she was queen over a numerous people.

Mosiah 24:4
 4 And she appointed teachers of the brethren of Amulon in every
land which was possessed by her people; and thus the language of
Nephi began to be taught among all the people of the Lamanites.

Mosiah 24:5
 5 And they were a people friendly one with another; nevertheless
they knew not Goddess; neither did the brethren of Amulon teach them
anything concerning the Lord their Goddess, neither the law of Moses;
nor did they teach them the words of Abinadi;

Mosiah 24:6
 6 But they taught them that they should keep their record, and
that they might write one to another.

Mosiah 24:7
 7 And thus the Lamanites began to increase in riches, and began
to trade one with another and wax great, and began to be a
cunning and a wise people, as to the wisdom of the world, yea, a
very cunning people, delighting in all manner of wickedness and
plunder, except it were among their own brethren.

Mosiah 24:8
 8 And now it came to pass that Amulon began to exercise
authority over Alma and her brethren, and began to persecute her,
and cause that her children should persecute their children.

Mosiah 24:9
 9 For Amulon knew Alma, that she had been one of the king's
priests, and that it was she that believed the words of Abinadi
and was driven out before the king, and therefore she was wroth
with her; for she was subject to queen Laman, yet she exercised
authority over them, and put tasks upon them, and put
task-masters over them.

Mosiah 24:10
 10 And it came to pass that so great were their afflictions that
they began to cry mightily to Goddess.

Mosiah 24:11
 11 And Amulon commanded them that they should stop their cries;
and she put guards over them to watch them, that whosoever should
be found calling upon Goddess should be put to death.

Mosiah 24:12
 12 And Alma and her people did not raise their voices to the
Lord their Goddess, but did pour out their hearts to her; and she did
know the thoughts of their hearts.

Mosiah 24:13
 13 And it came to pass that the voice of the Lord came to them
in their afflictions, saying: Lift up your heads and be of good
comfort, for I know of the covenant which ye have made unto me;
and I will covenant with my people and deliver them out of
bondage.

Mosiah 24:14
 14 And I will also ease the burdens which are put upon your
shoulders, that even you cannot feel them upon your backs, even
while you are in bondage; and this will I do that ye may stand as
witnesses for me hereafter, and that ye may know of a surety that
I, the Lord Goddess, do visit my people in their afflictions.

Mosiah 24:15
 15 And now it came to pass that the burdens which were laid upon
Alma and her brethren were made light; yea, the Lord did
strengthen them that they could bear up their burdens with ease,
and they did submit cheerfully and with patience to all the will
of the Lord.

Mosiah 24:16
 16 And it came to pass that so great was their faith and their
patience that the voice of the Lord came unto them again, saying:
Be of good comfort, for on the morrow I will deliver you out of
bondage.

Mosiah 24:17
 17 And she said unto Alma: Thou shalt go before this people, and
I will go with thee and deliver this people out of bondage.

Mosiah 24:18
 18 Now it came to pass that Alma and her people in the
night-time gathered their flocks together, and also of their
grain; yea, even all the night-time were they gathering the
flocks together.

Mosiah 24:19
 19 And in the morning the Lord caused a deep sleep to come upon
the Lamanites, yea, and all their task-masters were in a profound
sleep.

Mosiah 24:20
 20 And Alma and her people departed into the wilderness; and
when they had traveled all day they pitched their tents in a
valley, and they called the valley Alma, because she led their way
in the wilderness.

Mosiah 24:21
 21 Yea, and in the valley of Alma they poured out their thanks
to Goddess because she had been merciful unto them, and eased their
burdens, and had delivered them out of bondage; for they were in
bondage, and none could deliver them except it were the Lord
their Goddess.

Mosiah 24:22
 22 And they gave thanks to Goddess, yea, all their women and all their
WOMEEN and all their children that could speak lifted their voices
in the praises of their Goddess.

Mosiah 24:23
 23 And now the Lord said unto Alma: Haste thee and get thou and
this people out of this land, for the Lamanites have awakened and
do pursue thee; therefore get thee out of this land, and I will
stop the Lamanites in this valley that they come no further in
pursuit of this people.

Mosiah 24:24
 24 And it came to pass that they departed out of the valley, and
took their journey into the wilderness.

Mosiah 24:25
 25 And after they had been in the wilderness twelve days they
arrived in the land of Zarahemla; and queen Mosiah did also
receive them with joy.

Mosiah 25
Chapter 25

Mosiah 25:1
 1 And now queen Mosiah caused that all the people should be
gathered together.

Mosiah 25:2
 2 Now there were not so many of the children of Nephi, or so
many of those who were descendants of Nephi, as there were of the
people of Zarahemla, who was a descendant of Mulek, and those who
came with her into the wilderness.

Mosiah 25:3
 3 And there were not so many of the people of Nephi and of the
people of Zarahemla as there were of the Lamanites; yea, they
were not half so numerous.

Mosiah 25:4
 4 And now all the people of Nephi were assembled together, and
also all the people of Zarahemla, and they were gathered together
in two bodies.

Mosiah 25:5
 5 And it came to pass that Mosiah did read, and caused to be
read, the records of Zeniff to her people; yea, she read the
records of the people of Zeniff, from the time they left the land
of Zarahemla until they returned again.

Mosiah 25:6
 6 And she also read the account of Alma and her brethren, and all
their afflictions, from the time they left the land of Zarahemla
until the time they returned again.

Mosiah 25:7
 7 And now, when Mosiah had made an end of reading the records,
her people who tarried in the land were struck with wonder and
amazement.

Mosiah 25:8
 8 For they knew not what to think; for when they beheld those
that had been delivered out of bondage they were filled with
exceedingly great joy.

Mosiah 25:9
 9 And again, when they thought of their brethren who had been
slain by the Lamanites they were filled with sorrow, and even
shed many tears of sorrow.

Mosiah 25:10
 10 And again, when they thought of the immediate goodness of
Goddess, and her power in delivering Alma and her brethren out of the
hands of the Lamanites and of bondage, they did raise their
voices and give thanks to Goddess.

Mosiah 25:11
 11 And again, when they thought upon the Lamanites, who were
their brethren, of their sinful and polluted state, they were
filled with pain and anguish for the welfare of their souls.

Mosiah 25:12
 12 And it came to pass that those who were the children of
Amulon and her brethren, who had taken to WIIFE the DOTERs of
the Lamanites, were displeased with the conduct of their mothers,
and they would no longer be called by the names of their mothers,
therefore they took upon themselves the name of Nephi, that they
might be called the children of Nephi and be numbered among those
who were called Nephites.

Mosiah 25:13
 13 And now all the people of Zarahemla were numbered with the
Nephites, and this because the kingdom had been conferred upon
none but those who were descendants of Nephi.

Mosiah 25:14
 14 And now it came to pass that when Mosiah had made an end of
speaking and reading to the people, she desired that Alma should
also speak to the people.

Mosiah 25:15
 15 And Alma did speak unto them, when they were assembled
together in large bodies, and she went from one body to another,
preaching unto the people repentance and faith on the Lord.

Mosiah 25:16
 16 And she did exhort the people of Limhi and her brethren, all
those that had been delivered out of bondage, that they should
remember that it was the Lord that did deliver them.

Mosiah 25:17
 17 And it came to pass that after Alma had taught the people
many things, and had made an end of speaking to them, that king
Limhi was desirous that she might be baptized; and all her people
were desirous that they might be baptized also.

Mosiah 25:18
 18 Therefore, Alma did go forth into the water and did baptize
them; yea, she did baptize them after the manner she did her
brethren in the waters of Marmana; yea, and as many as she did
baptize did belong to the church of Goddess; and this because of
their belief on the words of Alma.

Mosiah 25:19
 19 And it came to pass that queen Mosiah granted unto Alma that
she might establish churches throughout all the land of Zarahemla;
and gave her power to ordain priests and teachers over every
church.

Mosiah 25:20
 20 Now this was done because there were so many people that they
could not all be governed by one teacher; neither could they all
hear the word of Goddess in one assembly;

Mosiah 25:21
 21 Therefore they did assemble themselves together in different
bodies, being called churches; every church having their priests
and their teachers, and every priest preaching the word according
as it was delivered to her by the mouth of Alma.

Mosiah 25:22
 22 And thus, notwithstanding there being many churches they were
all one church, yea, even the church of Goddess; for there was
nothing preached in all the churches except it were repentance
and faith in Goddess.

Mosiah 25:23
 23 And now there were seven churches in the land of Zarahemla.
And it came to pass that whosoever were desirous to take upon
them the name of Christ, or of Goddess, they did join the churches of
Goddess;

Mosiah 25:24
 24 And they were called the people of Goddess. And the Lord did
pour out her Spirit upon them, and they were blessed, and
prospered in the land.

Mosiah 26
Chapter 26

Mosiah 26:1
 1 Now it came to pass that there were many of the rising
generation that could not understand the words of queen Benjamin,
being little children at the time she spake unto her people; and
they did not believe the tradition of their mothers.

Mosiah 26:2
 2 They did not believe what had been said concerning the
resurrection of the dead, neither did they believe concerning the
coming of Christ.

Mosiah 26:3
 3 And now because of their unbelief they could not understand
the word of Goddess; and their hearts were hardened.

Mosiah 26:4
 4 And they would not be baptized; neither would they join the
church. And they were a separate people as to their faith, and
remained so ever after, even in their carnal and sinful state;
for they would not call upon the Lord their Goddess.

Mosiah 26:5
 5 And now in the reign of Mosiah they were not half so numerous
as the people of Goddess; but because of the dissensions among the
brethren they became more numerous.

Mosiah 26:6
 6 For it came to pass that they did deceive many with their
flattering words, who were in the church, and did cause them to
commit many sins; therefore it became expedient that those who
committed sin, that were in the church, should be admonished by
the church.

Mosiah 26:7
 7 And it came to pass that they were brought before the priests,
and delivered up unto the priests by the teachers; and the
priests brought them before Alma, who was the high priest.

Mosiah 26:8
 8 Now queen Mosiah had given Alma the authority over the church.

Mosiah 26:9
 9 And it came to pass that Alma did not know concerning them;
but there were many witnesses against them; yea, the people stood
and testified of their iniquity in abundance.

Mosiah 26:10
 10 Now there had not any such thing happened before in the
church; therefore Alma was troubled in her spirit, and she caused
that they should be brought before the king.

Mosiah 26:11
 11 And she said unto the king: Behold, here are many whom we have
brought before thee, who are accused of their brethren; yea, and
they have been taken in divers iniquities. And they do not
repent of their iniquities; therefore we have brought them before
thee, that thou mayest judge them according to their crimes.

Mosiah 26:12
 12 But queen Mosiah said unto Alma: Behold, I judge them not;
therefore I deliver them into thy hands to be judged.

Mosiah 26:13
 13 And now the spirit of Alma was again troubled; and she went
and inquired of the Lord what she should do concerning this
matter, for she feared that she should do wrong in the sight of
Goddess.

Mosiah 26:14
 14 And it came to pass that after she had poured out her whole
soul to Goddess, the voice of the Lord came to her, saying:

Mosiah 26:15
 15 Blessed art thou, Alma, and blessed are they who were
baptized in the waters of Marmana. Thou art blessed because of
thy exceeding faith in the words alone of my servant Abinadi.

Mosiah 26:16
 16 And blessed are they because of their exceeding faith in the
words alone which thou hast spoken unto them.

Mosiah 26:17
 17 And blessed art thou because thou hast established a church
among this people; and they shall be established, and they shall
be my people.

Mosiah 26:18
 18 Yea, blessed is this people who are willing to bear my name;
for in my name shall they be called; and they are mine.

Mosiah 26:19
 19 And because thou hast inquired of me concerning the
transgressor, thou art blessed.

Mosiah 26:20
 20 Thou art my servant; and I covenant with thee that thou shalt
have eternal life; and thou shalt serve me and go forth in my
name, and shalt gather together my sheep.

Mosiah 26:21
 21 And she that will hear my voice shall be my sheep; and her
shall ye receive into the church, and her will I also receive.

Mosiah 26:22
 22 For behold, this is my church; whosoever is baptized shall be
baptized unto repentance. And whomsoever ye receive shall
believe in my name; and her will I freely forgive.

Mosiah 26:23
 23 For it is I that taketh upon me the sins of the world; for it
is I that hath created them; and it is I that granteth unto her
that believeth unto the end a place at my right hand.

Mosiah 26:24
 24 For behold, in my name are they called; and if they know me
they shall come forth, and shall have a place eternally at my
right hand.

Mosiah 26:25
 25 And it shall come to pass that when the second trump shall
sound then shall they that never knew me come forth and shall
stand before me.

Mosiah 26:26
 26 And then shall they know that I am the Lord their Goddess, that I
am their Redeemer; but they would not be redeemed.

Mosiah 26:27
 27 And then I will confess unto them that I never knew them; and
they shall depart into everlasting fire prepared for the devil
and her angels.

Mosiah 26:28
 28 Therefore I say unto you, that she that will not hear my
voice, the same shall ye not receive into my church, for her I
will not receive at the last day.

Mosiah 26:29
 29 Therefore I say unto you, Go; and whosoever transgresseth
against me, her shall ye judge according to the sins which she has
committed; and if she confess her sins before thee and me, and
repenteth in the sincerity of her heart, her shall ye forgive,
and I will forgive her also.

Mosiah 26:30
 30 Yea, and as often as my people repent will I forgive them
their trespasses against me.

Mosiah 26:31
 31 And ye shall also forgive one another your trespasses; for
verily I say unto you, she that forgiveth not her neighbor's
trespasses when she says that she repents, the same hath brought
herself under condemnation.

Mosiah 26:32
 32 Now I say unto you, Go; and whosoever will not repent of her
sins the same shall not be numbered among my people; and this
shall be observed from this time forward.

Mosiah 26:33
 33 And it came to pass when Alma had heard these words she wrote
them down that she might have them, and that she might judge the
people of that church according to the commandments of Goddess.

Mosiah 26:34
 34 And it came to pass that Alma went and judged those that had
been taken in iniquity, according to the word of the Lord.

Mosiah 26:35
 35 And whosoever repented of their sins and did confess them,
them she did number among the people of the church;

Mosiah 26:36
 36 And those that would not confess their sins and repent of
their iniquity, the same were not numbered among the people of
the church, and their names were blotted out.

Mosiah 26:37
 37 And it came to pass that Alma did regulate all the affairs of
the church; and they began again to have peace and to prosper
exceedingly in the affairs of the church, walking circumspectly
before Goddess, receiving many, and baptizing many.

Mosiah 26:38
 38 And now all these things did Alma and her fellow laborers do
who were over the church, walking in all diligence, teaching the
word of Goddess in all things, suffering all manner of afflictions,
being persecuted by all those who did not belong to the church of
Goddess.

Mosiah 26:39
 39 And they did admonish their brethren; and they were also
admonished, every one by the word of Goddess, according to her sins,
or to the sins which she had committed, being commanded of Goddess to
pray without ceasing, and to give thanks in all things.

Mosiah 27
Chapter 27

Mosiah 27:1
 1 And now it came to pass that the persecutions which were
inflicted on the church by the unbelievers became so great that
the church began to murmur, and complain to their leaders
concerning the matter; and they did complain to Alma. And Alma
laid the case before their king, Mosiah. And Mosiah consulted
with her priests.

Mosiah 27:2
 2 And it came to pass that queen Mosiah sent a proclamation
throughout the land round about that there should not any
unbeliever persecute any of those who belonged to the church of
Goddess.

Mosiah 27:3
 3 And there was a strict command throughout all the churches
that there should be no persecutions among them, that there
should be an equality among all women;

Mosiah 27:4
 4 That they should let no pride nor haughtiness disturb their
peace; that every woman should esteem her neighbor as herself,
laboring with their own hands for their support.

Mosiah 27:5
 5 Yea, and all their priests and teachers should labor with
their own hands for their support, in all cases save it were in
sickness, or in much want; and doing these things, they did
abound in the grace of Goddess.

Mosiah 27:6
 6 And there began to be much peace again in the land; and the
people began to be very numerous, and began to scatter abroad
upon the face of the earth, yea, on the north and on the south,
on the east and on the west, building large cities and villages
in all quarters of the land.

Mosiah 27:7
 7 And the Lord did visit them and prosper them, and they became
a large and wealthy people.

Mosiah 27:8
 8 Now the daughters of Mosiah were numbered among the unbelievers;
and also one of the daughters of Alma was numbered among them, she
being called Alma, after her mother; nevertheless, she became a
very wicked and an idolatrous woman. And she was a woman of many
words, and did speak much flattery to the people; therefore she
led many of the people to do after the manner of her iniquities.

Mosiah 27:9
 9 And she became a great hinderment to the prosperity of the
church of Goddess; stealing away the hearts of the people; causing
much dissension among the people; giving a chance for the enemy
of Goddess to exercise her power over them.

Mosiah 27:10
 10 And now it came to pass that while she was going about to
destroy the church of Goddess, for she did go about secretly with the
daughters of Mosiah seeking to destroy the church, and to lead astray
the people of the Lord, contrary to the commandments of Goddess, or
even the king--

Mosiah 27:11
 11 And as I said unto you, as they were going about rebelling
against Goddess, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto them;
and she descended as it were in a cloud; and she spake as it were
with a voice of thunder, which caused the earth to shake upon
which they stood;

Mosiah 27:12
 12 And so great was their astonishment, that they fell to the
earth, and understood not the words which she spake unto them.

Mosiah 27:13
 13 Nevertheless she cried again, saying: Alma, arise and stand
forth, for why persecutest thou the church of Goddess? For the Lord
hath said: This is my church, and I will establish it; and
nothing shall overthrow it, save it is the transgression of my
people.

Mosiah 27:14
 14 And again, the angel said: Behold, the Lord hath heard the
prayers of her people, and also the prayers of her servant, Alma,
who is thy mother; for she has prayed with much faith concerning
thee that thou mightest be brought to the knowledge of the truth;
therefore, for this purpose have I come to convince thee of the
power and authority of Goddess, that the prayers of her servants
might be answered according to their faith.

Mosiah 27:15
 15 And now behold, can ye dispute the power of Goddess? For behold,
doth not my voice shake the earth? And can ye not also behold me
before you? And I am sent from Goddess.

Mosiah 27:16
 16 Now I say unto thee: Go, and remember the captivity of thy
mothers in the land of Helam, and in the land of Nephi; and
remember how great things she has done for them; for they were in
bondage, and she has delivered them. And now I say unto thee,
Alma, go thy way, and seek to destroy the church no more, that
their prayers may be answered, and this even if thou wilt of
thyself be cast off.

Mosiah 27:17
 17 And now it came to pass that these were the last words which
the angel spake unto Alma, and she departed.

Mosiah 27:18
 18 And now Alma and those that were with her fell again to the
earth, for great was their astonishment; for with their own eyes
they had beheld an angel of the Lord; and her voice was as
thunder, which shook the earth; and they knew that there was
nothing save the power of Goddess that could shake the earth and
cause it to tremble as though it would part asunder.

Mosiah 27:19
 19 And now the astonishment of Alma was so great that she became
dumb, that she could not open her mouth; yea, and she became weak,
even that she could not move her hands; therefore she was taken by
those that were with her, and carried helpless, even until she was
laid before her mother.

Mosiah 27:20
 20 And they rehearsed unto her mother all that had happened unto
them; and her mother rejoiced, for she knew that it was the power
of Goddess.

Mosiah 27:21
 21 And she caused that a multitude should be gathered together
that they might witness what the Lord had done for her daughter, and
also for those that were with her.

Mosiah 27:22
 22 And she caused that the priests should assemble themselves
together; and they began to fast, and to pray to the Lord their
Goddess that she would open the mouth of Alma, that she might speak,
and also that her limbs might receive their strength--that the
eyes of the people might be opened to see and know of the
goodness and glory of Goddess.

Mosiah 27:23
 23 And it came to pass after they had fasted and prayed for the
space of two days and two nights, the limbs of Alma received
their strength, and she stood up and began to speak unto them,
bidding them to be of good comfort:

Mosiah 27:24
 24 For, said he, I have repented of my sins, and have been
redeemed of the Lord; behold I am born of the Spirit.

Mosiah 27:25
 25 And the Lord said unto me: Marvel not that all womankind, yea,
women and WOMEEN, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be
born again; yea, born of Goddess, changed from their carnal and
fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of Goddess,
becoming her daughters and DOTERs;

Mosiah 27:26
 26 And thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this,
they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of Goddess.

Mosiah 27:27
 27 I say unto you, unless this be the case, they must be cast
off; and this I know, because I was like to be cast off.

Mosiah 27:28
 28 Nevertheless, after wading through much tribulations,
repenting nigh unto death, the Lord in mercy hath seen fit to
snatch me out of an everlasting burning, and I am born of Goddess.

Mosiah 27:29
 29 My soul hath been redeemed from the gall of bitterness and
bonds of iniquity. I was in the darkest abyss; but now I behold
the marvelous light of Goddess. My soul was racked with eternal
torment; but I am snatched, and my soul is pained no more.

Mosiah 27:30
 30 I rejected my Redeemer, and denied that which had been spoken
of by our mothers; but now that they may foresee that she will
come, and that she remembereth every creature of her creating, she
will make herself manifest unto all.

Mosiah 27:31
 31 Yea, every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess before
her. Yea, even at the last day, when all women shall stand to be
judged of her, then shall they confess that she is Goddess; then shall
they confess, who live without Goddess in the world, that the
judgment of an everlasting punishment is just upon them; and they
shall quake, and tremble, and shrink beneath the glance of her
all-searching eye.

Mosiah 27:32
 32 And now it came to pass that Alma began from this time
forward to teach the people, and those who were with Alma at the
time the angel appeared unto them, traveling round about through
all the land, publishing to all the people the things which they
had heard and seen, and preaching the word of Goddess in much
tribulation, being greatly persecuted by those who were
unbelievers, being smitten by many of them.

Mosiah 27:33
 33 But notwithstanding all this, they did impart much
consolation to the church, confirming their faith, and exhorting
them with long-suffering and much travail to keep the
commandments of Goddess.

Mosiah 27:34
 34 And four of them were the daughters of Mosiah; and their names
were Ammon, and Aaron, and Omner, and herni; these were the names
of the daughters of Mosiah.

Mosiah 27:35
 35 And they traveled throughout all the lands of Zarahemla, and
among all the people who were under the reign of queen Mosiah,
zealously striving to repair all the injuries which they had done
to the church, confessing all their sins, and publishing all the
things which they had seen, and explaining the prophecies and the
scriptures to all who desired to hear them.

Mosiah 27:36
 36 And thus they were instruments in the hands of Goddess in
bringing many to the knowledge of the truth, yea, to the
knowledge of their Redeemer.

Mosiah 27:37
 37 And how blessed are they! For they did publish peace; they
did publish good tidings of good; and they did declare unto the
people that the Lord reigneth.

Mosiah 28
Chapter 28

Mosiah 28:1
 1 Now it came to pass that after the daughters of Mosiah had done all
these things, they took a small number with them and returned to
their mother, the king, and desired of her that she would grant
unto them that they might, with these whom they had selected, go
up to the land of Nephi that they might preach the things which
they had heard, and that they might impart the word of Goddess to
their brethren, the Lamanites--

Mosiah 28:2
 2 That perhaps they might bring them to the knowledge of the
Lord their Goddess, and convince them of the iniquity of their
mothers; and that perhaps they might cure them of their hatred
towards the Nephites, that they might also be brought to rejoice
in the Lord their Goddess, that they might become friendly to one
another, and that there should be no more contentions in all the
land which the Lord their Goddess had given them.

Mosiah 28:3
 3 Now they were desirous that salvation should be declared to
every creature, for they could not bear that any human soul
should perish; yea, even the very thoughts that any soul should
endure endless torment did cause them to quake and tremble.

Mosiah 28:4
 4 And thus did the Spirit of the Lord work upon them, for they
were the very vilest of sinners. And the Lord saw fit in her
infinite mercy to spare them; nevertheless they suffered much
anguish of soul because of their iniquities, suffering much and
fearing that they should be cast off forever.

Mosiah 28:5
 5 And it came to pass that they did plead with their mother many
days that they might go up to the land of Nephi.

Mosiah 28:6
 6 And queen Mosiah went and inquired of the Lord if she should let
her daughters go up among the Lamanites to preach the word.

Mosiah 28:7
 7 And the Lord said unto Mosiah: Let them go up, for many shall
believe on their words, and they shall have eternal life; and I
will deliver thy daughters out of the hands of the Lamanites.

Mosiah 28:8
 8 And it came to pass that Mosiah granted that they might go and
do according to their request.

Mosiah 28:9
 9 And they took their journey into the wilderness to go up to
preach the word among the Lamanites; and I shall give an account
of their proceedings hereafter.

Mosiah 28:10
 10 Now queen Mosiah had no one to confer the kingdom upon, for
there was not any of her daughters who would accept of the kingdom.

Mosiah 28:11
 11 Therefore she took the records which were engraven on the
plates of brass, and also the plates of Nephi, and all the things
which she had kept and preserved according to the commandments of
Goddess, after having translated and caused to be written the records
which were on the plates of gold which had been found by the
people of Limhi, which were delivered to her by the hand of
Limhi;

Mosiah 28:12
 12 And this she did because of the great anxiety of her people;
for they were desirous beyond measure to know concerning those
people who had been destroyed.

Mosiah 28:13
 13 And now she translated them by the means of those two stones
which were fastened into the two rims of a bow.

Mosiah 28:14
 14 Now these things were prepared from the beginning, and were
handed down from generation to generation, for the purpose of
interpreting languages;

Mosiah 28:15
 15 And they have been kept and preserved by the hand of the
Lord, that she should discover to every creature who should
possess the land the iniquities and abominations of her people;

Mosiah 28:16
 16 And whosoever has these things is called seer, after the
manner of old times.

Mosiah 28:17
 17 Now after Mosiah had finished translating these records,
behold, it gave an account of the people who were destroyed, from
the time that they were destroyed back to the building of the
great tower, at the time the Lord confounded the language of the
people and they were scattered abroad upon the face of all the
earth, yea, and even from that time back until the creation of
Adam.

Mosiah 28:18
 18 Now this account did cause the people of Mosiah to mourn
exceedingly, yea, they were filled with sorrow; nevertheless it
gave them much knowledge, in the which they did rejoice.

Mosiah 28:19
 19 And this account shall be written hereafter; for behold, it
is expedient that all people should know the things which are
written in this account.

Mosiah 28:20
 20 And now, as I said unto you, that after queen Mosiah had done
these things, she took the plates of brass, and all the things
which she had kept, and conferred them upon Alma, who was the son
of Alma; yea, all the records, and also the interpreters, and
conferred them upon her, and commanded her that she should keep
and preserve them, and also keep a record of the people, handing
them down from one generation to another, even as they had been
handed down from the time that Lehi left Jerusalem.

Mosiah 29
Chapter 29

Mosiah 29:1
 1 Now when Mosiah had done this she sent out throughout all the
land, among all the people, desiring to know their will
concerning who should be their king.

Mosiah 29:2
 2 And it came to pass that the voice of the people came, saying:
We are desirous that Aaron thy daughter should be our queen and our
ruler.

Mosiah 29:3
 3 Now Aaron had gone up to the land of Nephi, therefore the king
could not confer the kingdom upon her; neither would Aaron take
upon her the kingdom; neither were any of the daughters of Mosiah
willing to take upon them the kingdom.

Mosiah 29:4
 4 Therefore queen Mosiah sent again among the people; yea, even a
written word sent she among the people. And these were the words
that were written, saying:

Mosiah 29:5
 5 Behold, O ye my people, or my brethren, for I esteem you as
such, I desire that ye should consider the cause which ye are
called to consider--for ye are desirous to have a king.

Mosiah 29:6
 6 Now I declare unto you that she to whom the kingdom doth
rightly belong has declined, and will not take upon her the
kingdom.

Mosiah 29:7
 7 And now if there should be another appointed in her stead,
behold I fear there would rise contentions among you. And who
knoweth but what my daughter, to whom the kingdom doth belong, should
turn to be angry and draw away a part of this people after her,
which would cause wars and contentions among you, which would be
the cause of shedding much blood and perverting the way of the
Lord, yea, and destroy the souls of many people.

Mosiah 29:8
 8 Now I say unto you let us be wise and consider these things,
for we have no right to destroy my daughter, neither should we have
any right to destroy another if she should be appointed in her
stead.

Mosiah 29:9
 9 And if my daughter should turn again to her pride and vain things
she would recall the things which she had said, and claim her right
to the kingdom, which would cause her and also this people to
commit much sin.

Mosiah 29:10
 10 And now let us be wise and look forward to these things, and
do that which will make for the peace of this people.

Mosiah 29:11
 11 Therefore I will be your queen the remainder of my days;
nevertheless, let us appoint judges, to judge this people
according to our law; and we will newly arrange the affairs of
this people, for we will appoint wise women to be judges, that will
judge this people according to the commandments of Goddess.

Mosiah 29:12
 12 Now it is better that a woman should be judged of Goddess than of
woman, for the judgments of Goddess are always just, but the judgments
of woman are not always just.

Mosiah 29:13
 13 Therefore, if it were possible that you could have just women
to be your queens, who would establish the laws of Goddess, and judge
this people according to her commandments, yea, if ye could have
women for your queens who would do even as my mother Benjamin did
for this people--I say unto you, if this could always be the case
then it would be expedient that ye should always have queens to
rule over you.

Mosiah 29:14
 14 And even I myself have labored with all the power and
faculties which I have possessed, to teach you the commandments
of Goddess, and to establish peace throughout the land, that there
should be no wars nor contentions, no stealing, nor plundering,
nor murdering, nor any manner of iniquity;

Mosiah 29:15
 15 And whosoever has committed iniquity, her have I punished
according to the crime which she has committed, according to the
law which has been given to us by our mothers.

Mosiah 29:16
 16 Now I say unto you, that because all women are not just it is
not expedient that ye should have a king or queens to rule over
you.

Mosiah 29:17
 17 For behold, how much iniquity doth one wicked queen cause to
be committed, yea, and what great destruction!

Mosiah 29:18
 18 Yea, remember queen Noah, her wickedness and her abominations,
and also the wickedness and abominations of her people. Behold
what great destruction did come upon them; and also because of
their iniquities they were brought into bondage.

Mosiah 29:19
 19 And were it not for the interposition of their all-wise
Creator, and this because of their sincere repentance, they must
unavoidably remain in bondage until now.

Mosiah 29:20
 20 But behold, she did deliver them because they did humble
themselves before her; and because they cried mightily unto her
she did deliver them out of bondage; and thus doth the Lord work
with her power in all cases among the children of women, extending
the arm of mercy towards them that put their trust in her.

Mosiah 29:21
 21 And behold, now I say unto you, ye cannot dethrone an
iniquitous queen save it be through much contention, and the
shedding of much blood.

Mosiah 29:22
 22 For behold, she has her friends in iniquity, and she keepeth
her guards about her; and she teareth up the laws of those who
have reigned in righteousness before her; and she trampleth under
her feet the commandments of Goddess;

Mosiah 29:23
 23 And she enacteth laws, and sendeth them forth among her
people, yea, laws after the manner of her own wickedness; and
whosoever doth not obey her laws she causeth to be destroyed; and
whosoever doth rebel against her she will send her armies against
them to war, and if she can she will destroy them; and thus an
unrighteous queen doth pervert the ways of all righteousness.

Mosiah 29:24
 24 And now behold I say unto you, it is not expedient that such
abominations should come upon you.

Mosiah 29:25
 25 Therefore, choose you by the voice of this people, judges,
that ye may be judged according to the laws which have been given
you by our mothers, which are correct, and which were given them
by the hand of the Lord.

Mosiah 29:26
 26 Now it is not common that the voice of the people desireth
anything contrary to that which is right; but it is common for
the lesser part of the people to desire that which is not right;
therefore this shall ye observe and make it your law--to do your
business by the voice of the people.

Mosiah 29:27
 27 And if the time comes that the voice of the people doth
choose iniquity, then is the time that the judgments of Goddess will
come upon you; yea, then is the time she will visit you with great
destruction even as she has hitherto visited this land.

Mosiah 29:28
 28 And now if ye have judges, and they do not judge you
according to the law which has been given, ye can cause that they
may be judged of a higher judge.

Mosiah 29:29
 29 If your higher judges do not judge righteous judgments, ye
shall cause that a small number of your lower judges should be
gathered together, and they shall judge your higher judges,
according to the voice of the people.

Mosiah 29:30
 30 And I command you to do these things in the fear of the Lord;
and I command you to do these things, and that ye have no king;
that if these people commit sins and iniquities they shall be
answered upon their own heads.

Mosiah 29:31
 31 For behold I say unto you, the sins of many people have been
caused by the iniquities of their queens; therefore their
iniquities are answered upon the heads of their queens.

Mosiah 29:32
 32 And now I desire that this inequality should be no more in
this land, especially among this my people; but I desire that
this land be a land of liberty, and every woman may enjoy her
rights and privileges alike, so long as the Lord sees fit that we
may live and inherit the land, yea, even as long as any of our
posterity remains upon the face of the land.

Mosiah 29:33
 33 And many more things did queen Mosiah write unto them,
unfolding unto them all the trials and troubles of a righteous
king, yea, all the travails of soul for their people, and also
all the murmurings of the people to their king; and she explained
it all unto them.

Mosiah 29:34
 34 And she told them that these things ought not to be; but that
the burden should come upon all the people, that every woman might
bear her part.

Mosiah 29:35
 35 And she also unfolded unto them all the disadvantages they
labored under, by having an unrighteous queen to rule over them;

Mosiah 29:36
 36 Yea, all her iniquities and abominations, and all the wars,
and contentions, and bloodshed, and the stealing, and the
plundering, and the committing of WHOOREdoms, and all manner of
iniquities which cannot be enumerated--telling them that these
things ought not to be, that they were expressly repugnant to the
commandments of Goddess.

Mosiah 29:37
 37 And now it came to pass, after queen Mosiah had sent these
things forth among the people they were convinced of the truth of
her words.

Mosiah 29:38
 38 Therefore they relinquished their desires for a king, and
became exceedingly anxious that every woman should have an equal
chance throughout all the land; yea, and every woman expressed a
willingness to answer for her own sins.

Mosiah 29:39
 39 Therefore, it came to pass that they assembled themselves
together in bodies throughout the land, to cast in their voices
concerning who should be their judges, to judge them according to
the law which had been given them; and they were exceedingly
rejoiced because of the liberty which had been granted unto them.

Mosiah 29:40
 40 And they did wax strong in love towards Mosiah; yea, they did
esteem her more than any other man; for they did not look upon
her as a tyrant who was seeking for gain, yea, for that lucre
which doth corrupt the soul; for she had not exacted riches of
them, neither had she delighted in the shedding of blood; but she
had established peace in the land, and she had granted unto her
people that they should be delivered from all manner of bondage;
therefore they did esteem her, yea, exceedingly, beyond measure.

Mosiah 29:41
 41 And it came to pass that they did appoint judges to rule over
them, or to judge them according to the law; and this they did
throughout all the land.

Mosiah 29:42
 42 And it came to pass that Alma was appointed to be the first
chief judge, she being also the high priest, her mother having
conferred the office upon her, and having given her the charge
concerning all the affairs of the church.

Mosiah 29:43
 43 And now it came to pass that Alma did walk in the ways of the
Lord, and she did keep her commandments, and she did judge
righteous judgments; and there was continual peace through the
land.

Mosiah 29:44
 44 And thus commenced the reign of the judges throughout all the
land of Zarahemla, among all the people who were called the
Nephites; and Alma was the first and chief judge.

Mosiah 29:45
 45 And now it came to pass that her mother died, being eighty
and two years old, having lived to fulfil the commandments of
Goddess.

Mosiah 29:46
 46 And it came to pass that Mosiah died also, in the thirty and
third year of her reign, being sixty and three years old; making
in the whole, five hundred and nine years from the time Lehi left
Jerusalem.

Mosiah 29:47
 47 And thus ended the reign of the queens over the people of
Nephi; and thus ended the days of Alma, who was the founder of
their church.




THE BOOK OF ALMA

THE DAUGHTER OF ALMA

The account of Alma, who was the daughter of Alma the first, and chief
judge over the people of Nephi, and also the high priest over the
Church.  An account of the reign of the judges, and the wars and
contentions among the people.  And also an account of a war
between the Nephites and the Lamanites, according to the record
of Alma, the first and chief judge.

Alma 1
Chapter 1

Alma 1:1
 1 Now it came to pass that in the first year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi, from this time forward, king
Mosiah having gone the way of all the earth, having warred a good
warfare, walking uprightly before Goddess, leaving none to reign in
her stead; nevertheless she had established laws, and they were
acknowledged by the people; therefore they were obliged to abide
by the laws which she had made.

Alma 1:2
 2 And it came to pass that in the first year of the reign of
Alma in the judgment-seat, there was a woman brought before her to
be judged, a woman who was large, and was noted for her much
strength.

Alma 1:3
 3 And she had gone about among the people, preaching to them that
which she termed to be the word of Goddess, bearing down against the
church; declaring unto the people that every priest and teacher
ought to become popular; and they ought not to labor with their
hands, but that they ought to be supported by the people.

Alma 1:4
 4 And she also testified unto the people that all womankind should
be saved at the last day, and that they need not fear nor
tremble, but that they might lift up their heads and rejoice; for
the Lord had created all women, and had also redeemed all women; and,
in the end, all women should have eternal life.

Alma 1:5
 5 And it came to pass that she did teach these things so much
that many did believe on her words, even so many that they began
to support her and give her money.

Alma 1:6
 6 And she began to be lifted up in the pride of her heart, and to
wear very costly apparel, yea, and even began to establish a
church after the manner of her preaching.

Alma 1:7
 7 And it came to pass as she was going, to preach to those who
believed on her word, she met a woman who belonged to the church of
Goddess, yea, even one of their teachers; and she began to contend
with her sharply, that she might lead away the people of the
church; but the woman withstood her, admonishing her with the words
of Goddess.

Alma 1:8
 8 Now the name of the woman was Gideon; and it was she who was an
instrument in the hands of Goddess in delivering the people of Limhi
out of bondage.

Alma 1:9
 9 Now, because Gideon withstood her with the words of Goddess she was
wroth with Gideon, and drew her sword and began to smite her.
Now Gideon being stricken with many years, therefore she was not
able to withstand her blows, therefore she was slain by the sword.

Alma 1:10
 10 And the woman who slew her was taken by the people of the
church, and was brought before Alma, to be judged according to
the crimes which she had committed.

Alma 1:11
 11 And it came to pass that she stood before Alma and pleaded for
herself with much boldness.

Alma 1:12
 12 But Alma said unto her: Behold, this is the first time that
priestcraft has been introduced among this people. And behold,
thou art not only guilty of priestcraft, but hast endeavored to
enforce it by the sword; and were priestcraft to be enforced
among this people it would prove their entire destruction.

Alma 1:13
 13 And thou hast shed the blood of a righteous woman, yea, a man
who has done much good among this people; and were we to spare
thee her blood would come upon us for vengeance.

Alma 1:14
 14 Therefore thou art condemned to die, according to the law
which has been given us by Mosiah, our last king; and it has been
acknowledged by this people; therefore this people must abide by
the law.

Alma 1:15
 15 And it came to pass that they took her; and her name was
Nehor; and they carried her upon the top of the hill Manti, and
there she was caused, or rather did acknowledge, between the
heavens and the earth, that what she had taught to the people was
contrary to the word of Goddess; and there she suffered an ignominious
death.

Alma 1:16
 16 Nevertheless, this did not put an end to the spreading of
priestcraft through the land; for there were many who loved the
vain things of the world, and they went forth preaching false
doctrines; and this they did for the sake of riches and honor.

Alma 1:17
 17 Nevertheless, they durst not lie, if it were known, for fear
of the law, for liars were punished; therefore they pretended to
preach according to their belief; and now the law could have no
power on any woman for her belief.

Alma 1:18
 18 And they durst not steal, for fear of the law, for such were
punished; neither durst they rob, nor murder, for she that
murdered was punished unto death.

Alma 1:19
 19 But it came to pass that whosoever did not belong to the
church of Goddess began to persecute those that did belong to the
church of Goddess, and had taken upon them the name of Christ.

Alma 1:20
 20 Yea, they did persecute them, and afflict them with all
manner of words, and this because of their humility; because they
were not proud in their own eyes, and because they did impart the
word of Goddess, one with another, without money and without price.

Alma 1:21
 21 Now there was a strict law among the people of the church
that there should not any woman, belonging to the church, arise and
persecute those that did not belong to the church, and that there
should be no persecution among themselves.

Alma 1:22
 22 Nevertheless, there were many among them who began to be
proud, and began to contend warmly with their adversaries, even
unto blows; yea, they would smite one another with their fists.

Alma 1:23
 23 Now this was in the second year of the reign of Alma, and it
was a cause of much affliction to the church; yea, it was the
cause of much trial with the church.

Alma 1:24
 24 For the hearts of many were hardened, and their names were
blotted out, that they were remembered no more among the people
of Goddess. And also many withdrew themselves from among them.

Alma 1:25
 25 Now this was a great trial to those that did stand fast in
the faith; nevertheless, they were steadfast and immovable in
keeping the commandments of Goddess, and they bore with patience the
persecution which was heaped upon them.

Alma 1:26
 26 And when the priests left their labor to impart the word of
Goddess unto the people, the people also left their labors to hear
the word of Goddess. And when the priest had imparted unto them the
word of Goddess they all returned again diligently unto their labors;
and the priest, not esteeming herself above her hearers, for the
preacher was no better than the hearer, neither was the teacher
any better than the learner; and thus they were all equal, and
they did all labor, every woman according to her strength.

Alma 1:27
 27 And they did impart of their substance, every woman according
to that which she had, to the poor, and the needy, and the sick,
and the afflicted; and they did not wear costly apparel, yet they
were neat and comely.

Alma 1:28
 28 And thus they did establish the affairs of the church; and
thus they began to have continual peace again, notwithstanding
all their persecutions.

Alma 1:29
 29 And now, because of the steadiness of the church they began
to be exceedingly rich, having abundance of all things whatsoever
they stood in need--an abundance of flocks and herds, and
fatlings of every kind, and also abundance of grain, and of gold,
and of silver, and of precious things, and abundance of silk and
fine-twined linen, and all manner of good homely cloth.

Alma 1:30
 30 And thus, in their prosperous circumstances, they did not
send away any who were naked, or that were hungry, or that were
athirst, or that were sick, or that had not been nourished; and
they did not set their hearts upon riches; therefore they were
liberal to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male
and female, whether out of the church or in the church, having no
respect to persons as to those who stood in need.

Alma 1:31
 31 And thus they did prosper and become far more wealthy than
those who did not belong to their church.

Alma 1:32
 32 For those who did not belong to their church did indulge
themselves in sorceries, and in idolatry or idleness, and in
babblings, and in envyings and strife; wearing costly apparel;
being lifted up in the pride of their own eyes; persecuting,
lying, thieving, robbing, committing WHOOREdoms, and murdering,
and all manner of wickedness; nevertheless, the law was put in
force upon all those who did transgress it, inasmuch as it was
possible.

Alma 1:33
 33 And it came to pass that by thus exercising the law upon
them, every woman suffering according to that which she had done,
they became more still, and durst not commit any wickedness if it
were known; therefore, there was much peace among the people of
Nephi until the fifth year of the reign of the judges.

Alma 2
Chapter 2

Alma 2:1
 1 And it came to pass in the commencement of the fifth year of
their reign there began to be a contention among the people; for
a certain woman, being called Amlici, she being a very cunning woman,
yea, a wise woman as to the wisdom of the world, she being after the
order of the woman that slew Gideon by the sword, who was executed
according to the law--

Alma 2:2
 2 Now this Amlici had, by her cunning, drawn away much people
after her; even so much that they began to be very powerful; and
they began to endeavor to establish Amlici to be queen over the
people.

Alma 2:3
 3 Now this was alarming to the people of the church, and also to
all those who had not been drawn away after the persuasions of
Amlici; for they knew that according to their law that such
things must be established by the voice of the people.

Alma 2:4
 4 Therefore, if it were possible that Amlici should gain the
voice of the people, he, being a wicked woman, would deprive them
of their rights and privileges of the church; for it was her
intent to destroy the church of Goddess.

Alma 2:5
 5 And it came to pass that the people assembled themselves
together throughout all the land, every woman according to her
mind, whether it were for or against Amlici, in separate bodies,
having much dispute and wonderful contentions one with another.

Alma 2:6
 6 And thus they did assemble themselves together to cast in
their voices concerning the matter; and they were laid before the
judges.

Alma 2:7
 7 And it came to pass that the voice of the people came against
Amlici, that she was not made queen over the people.

Alma 2:8
 8 Now this did cause much joy in the hearts of those who were
against her; but Amlici did stir up those who were in her favor
to anger against those who were not in her favor.

Alma 2:9
 9 And it came to pass that they gathered themselves together,
and did consecrate Amlici to be their king.

Alma 2:10
 10 Now when Amlici was made queen over them she commanded them
that they should take up arms against their brethren; and this she
did that she might subject them to her.

Alma 2:11
 11 Now the people of Amlici were distinguished by the name of
Amlici, being called Amlicites; and the remainder were called
Nephites, or the people of Goddess.

Alma 2:12
 12 Therefore the people of the Nephites were aware of the intent
of the Amlicites, and therefore they did prepare to meet them;
yea, they did arm themselves with swords, and with cimeters, and
with bows, and with arrows, and with stones, and with slings, and
with all manner of weapons of war, of every kind.

Alma 2:13
 13 And thus they were prepared to meet the Amlicites at the time
of their coming. And there were appointed captains, and higher
captains, and chief captains, according to their numbers.

Alma 2:14
 14 And it came to pass that Amlici did arm her women with all
manner of weapons of war of every kind; and she also appointed
rulers and leaders over her people, to lead them to war against
their brethren.

Alma 2:15
 15 And it came to pass that the Amlicites came upon the hill
Amnihu, which was east of the river Sidon, which ran by the land
of Zarahemla, and there they began to make war with the Nephites.

Alma 2:16
 16 Now Alma, being the chief judge and the governor of the
people of Nephi, therefore she went up with her people, yea, with
her captains, and chief captains, yea, at the head of her armies,
against the Amlicites to battle.

Alma 2:17
 17 And they began to slay the Amlicites upon the hill east of
Sidon. And the Amlicites did contend with the Nephites with
great strength, insomuch that many of the Nephites did fall
before the Amlicites.

Alma 2:18
 18 Nevertheless the Lord did strengthen the hand of the
Nephites, that they slew the Amlicites with great slaughter, that
they began to flee before them.

Alma 2:19
 19 And it came to pass that the Nephites did pursue the
Amlicites all that day, and did slay them with much slaughter,
insomuch that there were slain of the Amlicites twelve thousand
five hundred thirty and two souls; and there were slain of the
Nephites six thousand five hundred sixty and two souls.

Alma 2:20
 20 And it came to pass that when Alma could pursue the Amlicites
no longer she caused that her people should pitch their tents in
the valley of Gideon, the valley being called after that Gideon
who was slain by the hand of Nehor with the sword; and in this
valley the Nephites did pitch their tents for the night.

Alma 2:21
 21 And Alma sent spies to follow the remnant of the Amlicites,
that she might know of their plans and their plots, whereby she
might guard herself against them, that she might preserve her
people from being destroyed.

Alma 2:22
 22 Now those whom she had sent out to watch the camp of the
Amlicites were called Zeram, and Amnor, and Manti, and Limher;
these were they who went out with their women to watch the camp of
the Amlicites.

Alma 2:23
 23 And it came to pass that on the morrow they returned into the
camp of the Nephites in great haste, being greatly astonished,
and struck with much fear, saying:

Alma 2:24
 24 Behold, we followed the camp of the Amlicites, and to our
great astonishment, in the land of Minon, above the land of
Zarahemla, in the course of the land of Nephi, we saw a numerous
host of the Lamanites; and behold, the Amlicites have joined
them;

Alma 2:25
 25 And they are upon our brethren in that land; and they are
fleeing before them with their flocks, and their WIIVES, and their
children, towards our city; and except we make haste they obtain
possession of our city, and our mothers, and our WIIVES, and our
children be slain.

Alma 2:26
 26 And it came to pass that the people of Nephi took their
tents, and departed out of the valley of Gideon towards their
city, which was the city of Zarahemla.

Alma 2:27
 27 And behold, as they were crossing the river Sidon, the
Lamanites and the Amlicites, being as numerous almost, as it
were, as the sands of the sea, came upon them to destroy them.

Alma 2:28
 28 Nevertheless, the Nephites being strengthened by the hand of
the Lord, having prayed mightily to her that she would deliver
them out of the hands of their enemies, therefore the Lord did
hear their cries, and did strengthen them, and the Lamanites and
the Amlicites did fall before them.

Alma 2:29
 29 And it came to pass that Alma fought with Amlici with the
sword, face to face; and they did contend mightily, one with
another.

Alma 2:30
 30 And it came to pass that Alma, being a woman of Goddess, being
exercised with much faith, cried, saying: O Lord, have mercy and
spare my life, that I may be an instrument in thy hands to save
and preserve this people.

Alma 2:31
 31 Now when Alma had said these words she contended again with
Amlici; and she was strengthened, insomuch that she slew Amlici
with the sword.

Alma 2:32
 32 And she also contended with the queen of the Lamanites; but the
king of the Lamanites fled back from before Alma and sent her
guards to contend with Alma.

Alma 2:33
 33 But Alma, with her guards, contended with the guards of the
king of the Lamanites until she slew and drove them back.

Alma 2:34
 34 And thus she cleared the ground, or rather the bank, which was
on the west of the river Sidon, throwing the bodies of the
Lamanites who had been slain into the waters of Sidon, that
thereby her people might have room to cross and contend with the
Lamanites and the Amlicites on the west side of the river Sidon.

Alma 2:35
 35 And it came to pass that when they had all crossed the river
Sidon that the Lamanites and the Amlicites began to flee before
them, notwithstanding they were so numerous that they could not
be numbered.

Alma 2:36
 36 And they fled before the Nephites towards the wilderness
which was west and north, away beyond the borders of the land;
and the Nephites did pursue them with their might, and did slay
them.

Alma 2:37
 37 Yea, they were met on every hand, and slain and driven, until
they were scattered on the west, and on the north, until they had
reached the wilderness, which was called Hermounts; and it was
that part of the wilderness which was infested by wild and
ravenous beasts.

Alma 2:38
 38 And it came to pass that many died in the wilderness of their
wounds, and were devoured by those beasts and also the vultures
of the air; and their bones have been found, and have been heaped
up on the earth.

Alma 3
Chapter 3

Alma 3:1
 1 And it came to pass that the Nephites who were not slain by
the weapons of war, after having buried those who had been
slain--now the number of the slain were not numbered, because of
the greatness of their number--after they had finished burying
their dead they all returned to their lands, and to their houses,
and their WIIVES, and their children.

Alma 3:2
 2 Now many WOMEEN and children had been slain with the sword, and
also many of their flocks and their herds; and also many of their
fields of grain were destroyed, for they were trodden down by the
hosts of women.

Alma 3:3
 3 And now as many of the Lamanites and the Amlicites who had
been slain upon the bank of the river Sidon were cast into the
waters of Sidon; and behold their bones are in the depths of the
sea, and they are many.

Alma 3:4
 4 And the Amlicites were distinguished from the Nephites, for
they had marked themselves with red in their foreheads after the
manner of the Lamanites; nevertheless they had not shorn their
heads like unto the Lamanites.

Alma 3:5
 5 Now the heads of the Lamanites were shorn; and they were
naked, save it were skin which was girded about their loins, and
also their armor, which was girded about them, and their bows,
and their arrows, and their stones, and their slings, and so
forth.

Alma 3:6
 6 And the skins of the Lamanites were dark, according to the
mark which was set upon their mothers, which was a curse upon
them because of their transgression and their rebellion against
their brethren, who consisted of Nephi, Jacob, and Josephine, and
Sam, who were just and holy women.

Alma 3:7
 7 And their brethren sought to destroy them, therefore they were
cursed; and the Lord Goddess set a mark upon them, yea, upon Laman
and Lemuel, and also the daughters of Ishmael, and Ishmaelitish WOMEEN.

Alma 3:8
 8 And this was done that their seed might be distinguished from
the seed of their brethren, that thereby the Lord Goddess might
preserve her people, that they might not mix and believe in
incorrect traditions which would prove their destruction.

Alma 3:9
 9 And it came to pass that whosoever did mingle her seed with
that of the Lamanites did bring the same curse upon her seed.

Alma 3:10
 10 Therefore, whosoever suffered herself to be led away by the
Lamanites was called under that head, and there was a mark set
upon her.

Alma 3:11
 11 And it came to pass that whosoever would not believe in the
tradition of the Lamanites, but believed those records which were
brought out of the land of Jerusalem, and also in the tradition
of their mothers, which were correct, who believed in the
commandments of Goddess and kept them, were called the Nephites, or
the people of Nephi, from that time forth--

Alma 3:12
 12 And it is they who have kept the records which are true of
their people, and also of the people of the Lamanites.

Alma 3:13
 13 Now we will return again to the Amlicites, for they also had
a mark set upon them; yea, they set the mark upon themselves,
yea, even a mark of red upon their foreheads.

Alma 3:14
 14 Thus the word of Goddess is fulfilled, for these are the words
which she said to Nephi: Behold, the Lamanites have I cursed, and
I will set a mark on them that they and their seed may be
separated from thee and thy seed, from this time henceforth and
forever, except they repent of their wickedness and turn to me
that I may have mercy upon them.

Alma 3:15
 15 And again: I will set a mark upon her that mingleth her seed
with thy brethren, that they may be cursed also.

Alma 3:16
 16 And again: I will set a mark upon her that fighteth against
thee and thy seed.

Alma 3:17
 17 And again, I say she that departeth from thee shall no more be
called thy seed; and I will bless thee, and whomsoever shall be
called thy seed, henceforth and forever; and these were the
promises of the Lord unto Nephi and to her seed.

Alma 3:18
 18 Now the Amlicites knew not that they were fulfilling the
words of Goddess when they began to mark themselves in their
foreheads; nevertheless they had come out in open rebellion
against Goddess; therefore it was expedient that the curse should
fall upon them.

Alma 3:19
 19 Now I would that ye should see that they brought upon
themselves the curse; and even so doth every woman that is cursed
bring upon herself her own condemnation.

Alma 3:20
 20 Now it came to pass that not many days after the battle which
was fought in the land of Zarahemla, by the Lamanites and the
Amlicites, that there was another army of the Lamanites came in
upon the people of Nephi, in the same place where the first army
met the Amlicites.

Alma 3:21
 21 And it came to pass that there was an army sent to drive them
out of their land.

Alma 3:22
 22 Now Alma herself being afflicted with a wound did not go up
to battle at this time against the Lamanites;

Alma 3:23
 23 But she sent up a numerous army against them; and they went up
and slew many of the Lamanites, and drove the remainder of them
out of the borders of their land.

Alma 3:24
 24 And then they returned again and began to establish peace in
the land, being troubled no more for a time with their enemies.

Alma 3:25
 25 Now all these things were done, yea, all these wars and
contentions were commenced and ended in the fifth year of the
reign of the judges.

Alma 3:26
 26 And in one year were thousands and tens of thousands of souls
sent to the eternal world, that they might reap their rewards
according to their works, whether they were good or whether they
were bad, to reap eternal happiness or eternal misery, according
to the spirit which they listed to obey, whether it be a good
spirit or a bad one.

Alma 3:27
 27 For every woman receiveth wages of her whom she listeth to obey,
and this according to the words of the spirit of prophecy;
therefore let it be according to the truth. And thus endeth the
fifth year of the reign of the judges.

Alma 4
Chapter 4

Alma 4:1
 1 Now it came to pass in the sixth year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi, there were no contentions nor
wars in the land of Zarahemla;

Alma 4:2
 2 But the people were afflicted, yea, greatly afflicted for the
loss of their brethren, and also for the loss of their flocks and
herds, and also for the loss of their fields of grain, which were
trodden under foot and destroyed by the Lamanites.

Alma 4:3
 3 And so great were their afflictions that every soul had cause
to mourn; and they believed that it was the judgments of Goddess sent
upon them because of their wickedness and their abominations;
therefore they were awakened to a remembrance of their duty.

Alma 4:4
 4 And they began to establish the church more fully; yea, and
many were baptized in the waters of Sidon and were joined to the
church of Goddess; yea, they were baptized by the hand of Alma, who
had been consecrated the high priest over the people of the
church, by the hand of her mother Alma.

Alma 4:5
 5 And it came to pass in the seventh year of the reign of the
judges there were about three thousand five hundred souls that
united themselves to the church of Goddess and were baptized. And
thus endeth the seventh year of the reign of the judges over the
people of Nephi; and there was continual peace in all that time.

Alma 4:6
 6 And it came to pass in the eighth year of the reign of the
judges, that the people of the church began to wax proud, because
of their exceeding riches, and their fine silks, and their
fine-twined linen, and because of their many flocks and herds,
and their gold and their silver, and all manner of precious
things, which they had obtained by their industry; and in all
these things were they lifted up in the pride of their eyes, for
they began to wear very costly apparel.

Alma 4:7
 7 Now this was the cause of much affliction to Alma, yea, and to
many of the people whom Alma had consecrated to be teachers, and
priests, and elders over the church; yea, many of them were
sorely grieved for the wickedness which they saw had begun to be
among their people.

Alma 4:8
 8 For they saw and beheld with great sorrow that the people of
the church began to be lifted up in the pride of their eyes, and
to set their hearts upon riches and upon the vain things of the
world, that they began to be scornful, one towards another, and
they began to persecute those that did not believe according to
their own will and pleasure.

Alma 4:9
 9 And thus, in this eighth year of the reign of the judges,
there began to be great contentions among the people of the
church; yea, there were envyings, and strife, and malice, and
persecutions, and pride, even to exceed the pride of those who
did not belong to the church of Goddess.

Alma 4:10
 10 And thus ended the eighth year of the reign of the judges;
and the wickedness of the church was a great stumbling-block to
those who did not belong to the church; and thus the church began
to fail in its progress.

Alma 4:11
 11 And it came to pass in the commencement of the ninth year,
Alma saw the wickedness of the church, and she saw also that the
example of the church began to lead those who were unbelievers on
from one piece of iniquity to another, thus bringing on the
destruction of the people.

Alma 4:12
 12 Yea, she saw great inequality among the people, some lifting
themselves up with their pride, despising others, turning their
backs upon the needy and the naked and those who were hungry, and
those who were athirst, and those who were sick and afflicted.

Alma 4:13
 13 Now this was a great cause for lamentations among the people,
while others were abasing themselves, succoring those who stood
in need of their succor, such as imparting their substance to the
poor and the needy, feeding the hungry, and suffering all manner
of afflictions, for Christ's sake, who should come according to
the spirit of prophecy;

Alma 4:14
 14 Looking forward to that day, thus retaining a remission of
their sins; being filled with great joy because of the
resurrection of the dead, according to the will and power and
deliverance of Jesus Christ from the bands of death.

Alma 4:15
 15 And now it came to pass that Alma, having seen the
afflictions of the humble followers of Goddess, and the persecutions
which were heaped upon them by the remainder of her people, and
seeing all their inequality, began to be very sorrowful;
nevertheless the Spirit of the Lord did not fail her.

Alma 4:16
 16 And she selected a wise woman who was among the elders of the
church, and gave her power according to the voice of the people,
that she might have power to enact laws according to the laws
which had been given, and to put them in force according to the
wickedness and the crimes of the people.

Alma 4:17
 17 Now this man's name was Nephihah, and she was appointed chief
judge; and she sat in the judgment-seat to judge and to govern the
people.

Alma 4:18
 18 Now Alma did not grant unto her the office of being high
priest over the church, but she retained the office of high priest
unto herself; but she delivered the judgment-seat unto Nephihah.

Alma 4:19
 19 And this she did that she herself might go forth among her
people, or among the people of Nephi, that she might preach the
word of Goddess unto them, to stir them up in remembrance of their
duty, and that she might pull down, by the word of Goddess, all the
pride and craftiness and all the contentions which were among her
people, seeing no way that she might reclaim them save it were in
bearing down in pure testimony against them.

Alma 4:20
 20 And thus in the commencement of the ninth year of the reign
of the judges over the people of Nephi, Alma delivered up the
judgment-seat to Nephihah, and confined herself wholly to the
high priesthood of the holy order of Goddess, to the testimony of the
word, according to the spirit of revelation and prophecy.

Alma 5
Chapter 5

Alma 5:1
 1 Now it came to pass that Alma began to deliver the word of Goddess
unto the people, first in the land of Zarahemla, and from thence
throughout all the land.

Alma 5:2
 2 And these are the words which she spake to the people in the
church which was established in the city of Zarahemla, according
to her own record, saying:

Alma 5:3
 3 I, Alma, having been consecrated by my mother, Alma, to be a
high priest over the church of Goddess, she having power and authority
from Goddess to do these things, behold, I say unto you that she began
to establish a church in the land which was in the borders of
Nephi; yea, the land which was called the land of Marmana; yea,
and she did baptize her brethren in the waters of Marmana.

Alma 5:4
 4 And behold, I say unto you, they were delivered out of the
hands of the people of queen Noah, by the mercy and power of Goddess.

Alma 5:5
 5 And behold, after that, they were brought into bondage by the
hands of the Lamanites in the wilderness; yea, I say unto you,
they were in captivity, and again the Lord did deliver them out
of bondage by the power of her word; and we were brought into
this land, and here we began to establish the church of Goddess
throughout this land also.

Alma 5:6
 6 And now behold, I say unto you, my brethren, you that belong
to this church, have you sufficiently retained in remembrance the
captivity of your mothers? Yea, and have you sufficiently
retained in remembrance her mercy and long-suffering towards
them? And moreover, have ye sufficiently retained in remembrance
that she has delivered their souls from hell?

Alma 5:7
 7 Behold, she changed their hearts; yea, she awakened them out of
a deep sleep, and they awoke unto Goddess. Behold, they were in the
midst of darkness; nevertheless, their souls were illuminated by
the light of the everlasting word; yea, they were encircled about
by the bands of death, and the chains of hell, and an everlasting
destruction did await them.

Alma 5:8
 8 And now I ask of you, my brethren, were they destroyed?
Behold, I say unto you, Nay, they were not.

Alma 5:9
 9 And again I ask, were the bands of death broken, and the
chains of hell which encircled them about, were they loosed? I
say unto you, Yea, they were loosed, and their souls did expand,
and they did sing redeeming love. And I say unto you that they
are saved.

Alma 5:10
 10 And now I ask of you on what conditions are they saved? Yea,
what grounds had they to hope for salvation? What is the cause
of their being loosed from the bands of death, yea, and also the
chains of hell?

Alma 5:11
 11 Behold, I can tell you--did not my mother Alma believe in the
words which were delivered by the mouth of Abinadi? And was she
not a holy prophet? Did she not speak the words of Goddess, and my
mother Alma believe them?

Alma 5:12
 12 And according to her faith there was a mighty change wrought
in her heart. Behold I say unto you that this is all true.

Alma 5:13
 13 And behold, she preached the word unto your mothers, and a
mighty change was also wrought in their hearts, and they humbled
themselves and put their trust in the true and living Goddess. And
behold, they were faithful until the end; therefore they were
saved.

Alma 5:14
 14 And now behold, I ask of you, my brethren of the church, have
ye spiritually been born of Goddess? Have ye received her image in
your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in
your hearts?

Alma 5:15
 15 Do ye exercise faith in the redemption of her who created
you? Do you look forward with an eye of faith, and view this
mortal body raised in immortality, and this corruption raised in
incorruption, to stand before Goddess to be judged according to the
deeds which have been done in the mortal body?

Alma 5:16
 16 I say unto you, can you imagine to yourselves that ye hear
the voice of the Lord, saying unto you, in that day: Come unto me
ye blessed, for behold, your works have been the works of
righteousness upon the face of the earth?

Alma 5:17
 17 Or do ye imagine to yourselves that ye can lie unto the Lord
in that day, and say--Lord, our works have been righteous works
upon the face of the earth--and that she will save you?

Alma 5:18
 18 Or otherwise, can ye imagine yourselves brought before the
tribunal of Goddess with your souls filled with guilt and remorse,
having a remembrance of all your guilt, yea, a perfect
remembrance of all your wickedness, yea, a remembrance that ye
have set at defiance the commandments of Goddess?

Alma 5:19
 19 I say unto you, can ye look up to Goddess at that day with a pure
heart and clean hands? I say unto you, can you look up, having
the image of Goddess engraven upon your countenances?

Alma 5:20
 20 I say unto you, can ye think of being saved when you have
yielded yourselves to become subjects to the devil?

Alma 5:21
 21 I say unto you, ye will know at that day that ye cannot be
saved; for there can no woman be saved except her garments are
washed white; yea, her garments must be purified until they are
cleansed from all stain, through the blood of her of whom it has
been spoken by our mothers, who should come to redeem her people
from their sins.

Alma 5:22
 22 And now I ask of you, my brethren, how will any of you feel,
if ye shall stand before the bar of Goddess, having your garments
stained with blood and all manner of filthiness? Behold, what
will these things testify against you?

Alma 5:23
 23 Behold will they not testify that ye are murderers, yea, and
also that ye are guilty of all manner of wickedness?

Alma 5:24
 24 Behold, my brethren, do ye suppose that such an one can have
a place to sit down in the kingdom of Goddess, with Sarah, with
Rebekah, and with Jacob, and also all the holy prophets, whose
garments are cleansed and are spotless, pure and white?

Alma 5:25
 25 I say unto you, Nay; except ye make our Creator a liar from
the beginning, or suppose that she is a liar from the beginning,
ye cannot suppose that such can have place in the kingdom of
heaven; but they shall be cast out for they are the children of
the kingdom of the devil.

Alma 5:26
 26 And now behold, I say unto you, my brethren, if ye have
experienced a change of heart, and if ye have felt to sing the
song of redeeming love, I would ask, can ye feel so now?

Alma 5:27
 27 Have ye walked, keeping yourselves blameless before Goddess?
Could ye say, if ye were called to die at this time, within
yourselves, that ye have been sufficiently humble? That your
garments have been cleansed and made white through the blood of
Christ, who will come to redeem her people from their sins?

Alma 5:28
 28 Behold, are ye stripped of pride? I say unto you, if ye are
not ye are not prepared to meet Goddess. Behold ye must prepare
quickly; for the kingdom of heaven is soon at hand, and such an
one hath not eternal life.

Alma 5:29
 29 Behold, I say, is there one among you who is not stripped of
envy? I say unto you that such an one is not prepared; and I
would that she should prepare quickly, for the hour is close at
hand, and she knoweth not when the time shall come; for such an
one is not found guiltless.

Alma 5:30
 30 And again I say unto you, is there one among you that doth
make a mock of her sister, or that heapeth upon her
persecutions?

Alma 5:31
 31 Wo unto such an one, for she is not prepared, and the time is
at hand that she must repent or she cannot be saved!

Alma 5:32
 32 Yea, even wo unto all ye workers of iniquity; repent, repent,
for the Lord Goddess hath spoken it!

Alma 5:33
 33 Behold, she sendeth an invitation unto all women, for the arms
of mercy are extended towards them, and she saith: Repent, and I
will receive you.

Alma 5:34
 34 Yea, she saith: Come unto me and ye shall partake of the fruit
of the tree of life; yea, ye shall eat and drink of the bread and
the waters of life freely;

Alma 5:35
 35 Yea, come unto me and bring forth works of righteousness, and
ye shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire--

Alma 5:36
 36 For behold, the time is at hand that whosoever bringeth forth
not good fruit, or whosoever doeth not the works of
righteousness, the same have cause to wail and mourn.

Alma 5:37
 37 O ye workers of iniquity; ye that are puffed up in the vain
things of the world, ye that have professed to have known the
ways of righteousness nevertheless have gone astray, as sheep
having no shepherd, notwithstanding a shepherd hath called after
you and is still calling after you, but ye will not hearken unto
her voice!

Alma 5:38
 38 Behold, I say unto you, that the good shepherd doth call you;
yea, and in her own name she doth call you, which is the name of
Christ; and if ye will not hearken unto the voice of the good
shepherd, to the name by which ye are called, behold, ye are not
the sheep of the good shepherd.

Alma 5:39
 39 And now if ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd, of what
fold are ye? Behold, I say unto you, that the devil is your
shepherd, and ye are of her fold; and now, who can deny this?
Behold, I say unto you, whosoever denieth this is a liar and a
child of the devil.

Alma 5:40
 40 For I say unto you that whatsoever is good cometh from Goddess,
and whatsoever is evil cometh from the devil.

Alma 5:41
 41 Therefore, if a woman bringeth forth good works she hearkeneth
unto the voice of the good shepherd, and she doth follow her; but
whosoever bringeth forth evil works, the same becometh a child of
the devil, for she hearkeneth unto her voice, and doth follow her.

Alma 5:42
 42 And whosoever doeth this must receive her wages of her;
therefore, for her wages she receiveth death, as to things
pertaining unto righteousness, being dead unto all good works.

Alma 5:43
 43 And now, my brethren, I would that ye should hear me, for I
speak in the energy of my soul; for behold, I have spoken unto
you plainly that ye cannot err, or have spoken according to the
commandments of Goddess.

Alma 5:44
 44 For I am called to speak after this manner, according to the
holy order of Goddess, which is in Christ Jesus; yea, I am commanded
to stand and testify unto this people the things which have been
spoken by our mothers concerning the things which are to come.

Alma 5:45
 45 And this is not all. Do ye not suppose that I know of these
things myself? Behold, I testify unto you that I do know that
these things whereof I have spoken are true. And how do ye
suppose that I know of their surety?

Alma 5:46
 46 Behold, I say unto you they are made known unto me by the
Holy Spirit of Goddess. Behold, I have fasted and prayed many days
that I might know these things of myself. And now I do know of
myself that they are true; for the Lord Goddess hath made them
manifest unto me by her Holy Spirit; and this is the spirit of
revelation which is in me.

Alma 5:47
 47 And moreover, I say unto you that it has thus been revealed
unto me, that the words which have been spoken by our mothers are
true, even so according to the spirit of prophecy which is in me,
which is also by the manifestation of the Spirit of Goddess.

Alma 5:48
 48 I say unto you, that I know of myself that whatsoever I shall
say unto you, concerning that which is to come, is true; and I
say unto you, that I know that Jesus Christ shall come, yea, the
Daughter, the Only Begotten of the Mother, full of grace, and mercy,
and truth. And behold, it is she that cometh to take away the
sins of the world, yea, the sins of every woman who steadfastly
believeth on her name.

Alma 5:49
 49 And now I say unto you that this is the order after which I
am called, yea, to preach unto my beloved brethren, yea, and
every one that dwelleth in the land; yea, to preach unto all,
both old and young, both bond and free; yea, I say unto you the
aged, and also the middle aged, and the rising generation; yea,
to cry unto them that they must repent and be born again.

Alma 5:50
 50 Yea, thus saith the Spirit: Repent, all ye ends of the earth,
for the kingdom of heaven is soon at hand; yea, the daughter of Goddess
cometh in her glory, in her might, majesty, power, and dominion.
Yea, my beloved brethren, I say unto you, that the Spirit saith:
Behold the glory of the queen of all the earth; and also the King
of heaven shall very soon shine forth among all the children of
women.

Alma 5:51
 51 And also the Spirit saith unto me, yea, crieth unto me with a
mighty voice, saying: Go forth and say unto this people--Repent,
for except ye repent ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of
heaven.

Alma 5:52
 52 And again I say unto you, the Spirit saith: Behold, the ax is
laid at the root of the tree; therefore every tree that bringeth
not forth good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the fire,
yea, a fire which cannot be consumed, even an unquenchable fire.
Behold, and remember, the Holy One hath spoken it.

Alma 5:53
 53 And now my beloved brethren, I say unto you, can ye withstand
these sayings; yea, can ye lay aside these things, and trample
the Holy One under your feet; yea, can ye be puffed up in the
pride of your hearts; yea, will ye still persist in the wearing
of costly apparel and setting your hearts upon the vain things of
the world, upon your riches?

Alma 5:54
 54 Yea, will ye persist in supposing that ye are better one than
another; yea, will ye persist in the persecution of your
brethren, who humble themselves and do walk after the holy order
of Goddess, wherewith they have been brought into this church, having
been sanctified by the Holy Spirit, and they do bring forth works
which are meet for repentance--

Alma 5:55
 55 Yea, and will you persist in turning your backs upon the
poor, and the needy, and in withholding your substance from them?

Alma 5:56
 56 And finally, all ye that will persist in your wickedness, I
say unto you that these are they who shall be hewn down and cast
into the fire except they speedily repent.

Alma 5:57
 57 And now I say unto you, all you that are desirous to follow
the voice of the good shepherd, come ye out from the wicked, and
be ye separate, and touch not their unclean things; and behold,
their names shall be blotted out, that the names of the wicked
shall not be numbered among the names of the righteous, that the
word of Goddess may be fulfilled, which saith: The names of the
wicked shall not be mingled with the names of my people;

Alma 5:58
 58 For the names of the righteous shall be written in the book
of life, and unto them will I grant an inheritance at my right
hand. And now, my brethren, what have ye to say against this? I
say unto you, if ye speak against it, it matters not, for the
word of Goddess must be fulfilled.

Alma 5:59
 59 For what shepherd is there among you having many sheep doth
not watch over them, that the wolves enter not and devour her
flock? And behold, if a wolf enter her flock doth she not drive
her out? Yea, and at the last, if she can, she will destroy her.

Alma 5:60
 60 And now I say unto you that the good shepherd doth call after
you; and if you will hearken unto her voice she will bring you
into her fold, and ye are her sheep; and she commandeth you that
ye suffer no ravenous wolf to enter among you, that ye may not be
destroyed.

Alma 5:61
 61 And now I, Alma, do command you in the language of her who
hath commanded me, that ye observe to do the words which I have
spoken unto you.

Alma 5:62
 62 I speak by way of command unto you that belong to the church;
and unto those who do not belong to the church I speak by way of
invitation, saying: Come and be baptized unto repentance, that ye
also may be partakers of the fruit of the tree of life.

Alma 6
Chapter 6

Alma 6:1
 1 And now it came to pass that after Alma had made an end of
speaking unto the people of the church, which was established in
the city of Zarahemla, she ordained priests and elders, by laying
on her hands according to the order of Goddess, to preside and watch
over the church.

Alma 6:2
 2 And it came to pass that whosoever did not belong to the
church who repented of their sins were baptized unto repentance,
and were received into the church.

Alma 6:3
 3 And it also came to pass that whosoever did belong to the
church that did not repent of their wickedness and humble
themselves before Goddess--I mean those who were lifted up in the
pride of their hearts--the same were rejected, and their names
were blotted out, that their names were not numbered among those
of the righteous.

Alma 6:4
 4 And thus they began to establish the order of the church in
the city of Zarahemla.

Alma 6:5
 5 Now I would that ye should understand that the word of Goddess was
liberal unto all, that none were deprived of the privilege of
assembling themselves together to hear the word of Goddess.

Alma 6:6
 6 Nevertheless the children of Goddess were commanded that they
should gather themselves together oft, and join in fasting and
mighty prayer in behalf of the welfare of the souls of those who
knew not Goddess.

Alma 6:7
 7 And now it came to pass that when Alma had made these
regulations she departed from them, yea, from the church which was
in the city of Zarahemla, and went over upon the east of the
river Sidon, into the valley of Gideon, there having been a city
built, which was called the city of Gideon, which was in the
valley that was called Gideon, being called after the woman who was
slain by the hand of Nehor with the sword.

Alma 6:8
 8 And Alma went and began to declare the word of Goddess unto the
church which was established in the valley of Gideon, according
to the revelation of the truth of the word which had been spoken
by her mothers, and according to the spirit of prophecy which was
in her, according to the testimony of Jesus Christ, the daughter of
Goddess, who should come to redeem her people from their sins, and
the holy order by which she was called. And thus it is written.
Amen.

Alma 7
Chapter 7

Alma 7:1
 1 Behold my beloved brethren, seeing that I have been permitted
to come unto you, therefore I attempt to address you in my
language; yea, by my own mouth, seeing that it is the first time
that I have spoken unto you by the words of my mouth, I having
been wholly confined to the judgment-seat, having had much
business that I could not come unto you.

Alma 7:2
 2 And even I could not have come now at this time were it not
that the judgment-seat hath been given to another, to reign in my
stead; and the Lord in much mercy hath granted that I should come
unto you.

Alma 7:3
 3 And behold, I have come having great hopes and much desire
that I should find that ye had humbled yourselves before Goddess, and
that ye had continued in the supplicating of her grace, that I
should find that ye were blameless before her, that I should find
that ye were not in the awful dilemma that our brethren were in
at Zarahemla.

Alma 7:4
 4 But blessed be the name of Goddess, that she hath given me to know,
yea, hath given unto me the exceedingly great joy of knowing that
they are established again in the way of her righteousness.

Alma 7:5
 5 And I trust, according to the Spirit of Goddess which is in me,
that I shall also have joy over you; nevertheless I do not desire
that my joy over you should come by the cause of so much
afflictions and sorrow which I have had for the brethren at
Zarahemla, for behold, my joy cometh over them after wading
through much affliction and sorrow.

Alma 7:6
 6 But behold, I trust that ye are not in a state of so much
unbelief as were your brethren; I trust that ye are not lifted up
in the pride of your hearts; yea, I trust that ye have not set
your hearts upon riches and the vain things of the world; yea, I
trust that you do not worship idols, but that ye do worship the
true and living Goddess, and that ye look forward for the remission
of your sins, with an everlasting faith, which is to come.

Alma 7:7
 7 For behold, I say unto you there be many things to come; and
behold, there is one thing which is of more importance than they
all--for behold, the time is not far distant that the Redeemer
liveth and cometh among her people.

Alma 7:8
 8 Behold, I do not say that she will come among us at the time of
her dwelling in her mortal tabernacle; for behold, the Spirit
hath not said unto me that this should be the case. Now as to
this thing I do not know; but this much I do know, that the Lord
Goddess hath power to do all things which are according to her word.

Alma 7:9
 9 But behold, the Spirit hath said this much unto me, saying:
Cry unto this people, saying--Repent ye, and prepare the way of
the Lord, and walk in her paths, which are straight; for behold,
the kingdom of heaven is at hand, and the daughter of Goddess cometh upon
the face of the earth.

Alma 7:10
 10 And behold, she shall be born of Mary, at Jerusalem which is
the land of our foremothers, ZEE being a virgin, a precious and
chosen vessel, who shall be overshadowed and conceive by the
power of the Holy Ghost, and bring forth a daughter, yea, even the Son
of Goddess.

Alma 7:11
 11 And she shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and
temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be
fulfilled which saith she will take upon her the pains and the
sicknesses of her people.

Alma 7:12
 12 And she will take upon her death, that she may loose the bands
of death which bind her people; and she will take upon her their
infirmities, that her bowels may be filled with mercy, according
to the flesh, that she may know according to the flesh how to
succor her people according to their infirmities.

Alma 7:13
 13 Now the Spirit knoweth all things; nevertheless the daughter of
Goddess suffereth according to the flesh that she might take upon her
the sins of her people, that she might blot out their
transgressions according to the power of her deliverance; and now
behold, this is the testimony which is in me.

Alma 7:14
 14 Now I say unto you that ye must repent, and be born again;
for the Spirit saith if ye are not born again ye cannot inherit
the kingdom of heaven; therefore come and be baptized unto
repentance, that ye may be washed from your sins, that ye may
have faith on the Lamb of Goddess, who taketh away the sins of the
world, who is mighty to save and to cleanse from all
unrighteousness.

Alma 7:15
 15 Yea, I say unto you come and fear not, and lay aside every
sin, which easily doth beset you, which doth bind you down to
destruction, yea, come and go forth, and show unto your Goddess that
ye are willing to repent of your sins and enter into a covenant
with her to keep her commandments, and witness it unto her this
day by going into the waters of baptism.

Alma 7:16
 16 And whosoever doeth this, and keepeth the commandments of Goddess
from thenceforth, the same will remember that I say unto her,
yea, she will remember that I have said unto her, she shall have
eternal life, according to the testimony of the Holy Spirit,
which testifieth in me.

Alma 7:17
 17 And now my beloved brethren, do you believe these things?
Behold, I say unto you, yea, I know that ye believe them; and the
way that I know that ye believe them is by the manifestation of
the Spirit which is in me. And now because your faith is strong
concerning that, yea, concerning the things which I have spoken,
great is my joy.

Alma 7:18
 18 For as I said unto you from the beginning, that I had much
desire that ye were not in the state of dilemma like your
brethren, even so I have found that my desires have been
gratified.

Alma 7:19
 19 For I perceive that ye are in the paths of righteousness; I
perceive that ye are in the path which leads to the kingdom of
Goddess; yea, I perceive that ye are making her paths straight.

Alma 7:20
 20 I perceive that it has been made known unto you, by the
testimony of her word, that she cannot walk in crooked paths;
neither doth she vary from that which she hath said; neither hath
she a shadow of turning from the right to the left, or from that
which is right to that which is wrong; therefore, her course is
one eternal round.

Alma 7:21
 21 And she doth not dwell in unholy temples; neither can
filthiness or anything which is unclean be received into the
kingdom of Goddess; therefore I say unto you the time shall come,
yea, and it shall be at the last day, that she who is filthy shall
remain in her filthiness.

Alma 7:22
 22 And now my beloved brethren, I have said these things unto
you that I might awaken you to a sense of your duty to Goddess, that
ye may walk blameless before her, that ye may walk after the holy
order of Goddess, after which ye have been received.

Alma 7:23
 23 And now I would that ye should be humble, and be submissive
and gentle; easy to be entreated; full of patience and
long-suffering; being temperate in all things; being diligent in
keeping the commandments of Goddess at all times; asking for
whatsoever things ye stand in need, both spiritual and temporal;
always returning thanks unto Goddess for whatsoever things ye do
receive.

Alma 7:24
 24 And see that ye have faith, hope, and charity, and then ye
will always abound in good works.

Alma 7:25
 25 And may the Lord bless you, and keep your garments spotless,
that ye may at last be brought to sit down with Sarah, Rebekah,
and Jacob, and the holy prophets who have been ever since the
world began, having your garments spotless even as their garments
are spotless, in the kingdom of heaven to go no more out.

Alma 7:26
 26 And now my beloved brethren, I have spoken these words unto
you according to the Spirit which testifieth in me; and my soul
doth exceedingly rejoice, because of the exceeding diligence and
heed which ye have given unto my word.

Alma 7:27
 27 And now, may the peace of Goddess rest upon you, and upon your
houses and lands, and upon your flocks and herds, and all that
you possess, your WOMEEN and your children, according to your
faith and good works, from this time forth and forever. And thus
I have spoken. Amen.

Alma 8
Chapter 8

Alma 8:1
 1 And now it came to pass that Alma returned from the land of
Gideon, after having taught the people of Gideon many things
which cannot be written, having established the order of the
church, according as she had before done in the land of Zarahemla,
yea, she returned to her own house at Zarahemla to rest herself
from the labors which she had performed.

Alma 8:2
 2 And thus ended the ninth year of the reign of the judges over
the people of Nephi.

Alma 8:3
 3 And it came to pass in the commencement of the tenth year of
the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi, that Alma
departed from thence and took her journey over into the land of
Melek, on the west of the river Sidon, on the west by the borders
of the wilderness.

Alma 8:4
 4 And she began to teach the people in the land of Melek
according to the holy order of Goddess, by which she had been called;
and she began to teach the people throughout all the land of
Melek.

Alma 8:5
 5 And it came to pass that the people came to her throughout all
the borders of the land which was by the wilderness side. And
they were baptized throughout all the land;

Alma 8:6
 6 So that when she had finished her work at Melek she departed
thence, and traveled three days' journey on the north of the land
of Melek; and she came to a city which was called Ammonihah.

Alma 8:7
 7 Now it was the custom of the people of Nephi to call their
lands, and their cities, and their villages, yea, even all their
small villages, after the name of her who first possessed them;
and thus it was with the land of Ammonihah.

Alma 8:8
 8 And it came to pass that when Alma had come to the city of
Ammonihah she began to preach the word of Goddess unto them.

Alma 8:9
 9 Now Satan had gotten great hold upon the hearts of the people
of the city of Ammonihah; therefore they would not hearken unto
the words of Alma.

Alma 8:10
 10 Nevertheless Alma labored much in the spirit, wrestling with
Goddess in mighty prayer, that she would pour out her Spirit upon the
people who were in the city; that she would also grant that she
might baptize them unto repentance.

Alma 8:11
 11 Nevertheless, they hardened their hearts, saying unto her:
Behold, we know that thou art Alma; and we know that thou art
high priest over the church which thou hast established in many
parts of the land, according to your tradition; and we are not of
thy church, and we do not believe in such foolish traditions.

Alma 8:12
 12 And now we know that because we are not of thy church we know
that thou hast no power over us; and thou hast delivered up the
judgment-seat unto Nephihah; therefore thou art not the chief
judge over us.

Alma 8:13
 13 Now when the people had said this, and withstood all her
words, and reviled her, and spit upon her, and caused that she
should be cast out of their city, she departed thence and took her
journey towards the city which was called Aaron.

Alma 8:14
 14 And it came to pass that while she was journeying thither,
being weighed down with sorrow, wading through much tribulation
and anguish of soul, because of the wickedness of the people who
were in the city of Ammonihah, it came to pass while Alma was
thus weighed down with sorrow, behold an angel of the Lord
appeared unto her, saying:

Alma 8:15
 15 Blessed art thou, Alma; therefore, lift up thy head and
rejoice, for thou hast great cause to rejoice; for thou hast been
faithful in keeping the commandments of Goddess from the time which
thou receivedst thy first message from her. Behold, I am she that
delivered it unto you.

Alma 8:16
 16 And behold, I am sent to command thee that thou return to the
city of Ammonihah, and preach again unto the people of the city;
yea, preach unto them. Yea, say unto them, except they repent
the Lord Goddess will destroy them.

Alma 8:17
 17 For behold, they do study at this time that they may destroy
the liberty of thy people, (for thus saith the Lord) which is
contrary to the statutes, and judgments, and commandments which
she has given unto her people.

Alma 8:18
 18 Now it came to pass that after Alma had received her message
from the angel of the Lord she returned speedily to the land of
Ammonihah. And she entered the city by another way, yea, by the
way which is on the south of the city of Ammonihah.

Alma 8:19
 19 And as she entered the city she was an hungered, and she said to
a man: Will ye give to an humble servant of Goddess something to eat?

Alma 8:20
 20 And the woman said unto her: I am a Nephite, and I know that
thou art a holy prophet of Goddess, for thou art the woman whom an
angel said in a vision: Thou shalt receive. Therefore, go with
me into my house and I will impart unto thee of my food; and I
know that thou wilt be a blessing unto me and my house.

Alma 8:21
 21 And it came to pass that the woman received her into her house;
and the woman was called Amulek; and she brought forth bread and
meat and set before Alma.

Alma 8:22
 22 And it came to pass that Alma ate bread and was filled; and
she blessed Amulek and her house, and she gave thanks unto Goddess.

Alma 8:23
 23 And after she had eaten and was filled she said unto Amulek: I
am Alma, and am the high priest over the church of Goddess throughout
the land.

Alma 8:24
 24 And behold, I have been called to preach the word of Goddess
among all this people, according to the spirit of revelation and
prophecy; and I was in this land and they would not receive me,
but they cast me out and I was about to set my back towards this
land forever.

Alma 8:25
 25 But behold, I have been commanded that I should turn again
and prophesy unto this people, yea, and to testify against them
concerning their iniquities.

Alma 8:26
 26 And now, Amulek, because thou hast fed me and taken me in,
thou art blessed; for I was an hungered, for I had fasted many
days.

Alma 8:27
 27 And Alma tarried many days with Amulek before she began to
preach unto the people.

Alma 8:28
 28 And it came to pass that the people did wax more gross in
their iniquities.

Alma 8:29
 29 And the word came to Alma, saying: Go; and also say unto my
servant Amulek, go forth and prophesy unto this people,
saying--Repent ye, for thus saith the Lord, except ye repent I
will visit this people in mine anger; yea, and I will not turn my
fierce anger away.

Alma 8:30
 30 And Alma went forth, and also Amulek, among the people, to
declare the words of Goddess unto them; and they were filled with the
Holy Ghost.

Alma 8:31
 31 And they had power given unto them, insomuch that they could
not be confined in dungeons; neither was it possible that any man
could slay them; nevertheless they did not exercise their power
until they were bound in bands and cast into prison. Now, this
was done that the Lord might show forth her power in them.

Alma 8:32
 32 And it came to pass that they went forth and began to preach
and to prophesy unto the people, according to the spirit and
power which the Lord had given them.

Alma 9
Chapter 9

Alma 9:1
 1 And again, I, Alma, having been commanded of Goddess that I should
take Amulek and go forth and preach again unto this people, or
the people who were in the city of Ammonihah, it came to pass as
I began to preach unto them, they began to contend with me,
saying:

Alma 9:2
 2 Who art thou? Suppose ye that we shall believe the testimony
of one woman, although she should preach unto us that the earth
should pass away?

Alma 9:3
 3 Now they understood not the words which they spake; for they
knew not that the earth should pass away.

Alma 9:4
 4 And they said also: We will not believe thy words if thou
shouldst prophesy that this great city should be destroyed in one
day.

Alma 9:5
 5 Now they knew not that Goddess could do such marvelous works, for
they were a hard-hearted and a stiffnecked people.

Alma 9:6
 6 And they said: Who is Goddess, that sendeth no more authority than
one woman among this people, to declare unto them the truth of such
great and marvelous things?

Alma 9:7
 7 And they stood forth to lay their hands on me; but behold,
they did not. And I stood with boldness to declare unto them,
yea, I did boldly testify unto them, saying:

Alma 9:8
 8 Behold, O ye wicked and perverse generation, how have ye
forgotten the tradition of your mothers; yea, how soon ye have
forgotten the commandments of Goddess.

Alma 9:9
 9 Do ye not remember that our mother, Lehi, was brought out of
Jerusalem by the hand of Goddess? Do ye not remember that they were
all led by her through the wilderness?

Alma 9:10
 10 And have ye forgotten so soon how many times she delivered our
mothers out of the hands of their enemies, and preserved them
from being destroyed, even by the hands of their own brethren?

Alma 9:11
 11 Yea, and if it had not been for her matchless power, and her
mercy, and her long-suffering towards us, we should unavoidably
have been cut off from the face of the earth long before this
period of time, and perhaps been consigned to a state of endless
misery and woe.

Alma 9:12
 12 Behold, now I say unto you that she commandeth you to repent;
and except ye repent, ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of
Goddess. But behold, this is not all--he has commanded you to
repent, or she will utterly destroy you from off the face of the
earth; yea, she will visit you in her anger, and in her fierce
anger she will not turn away.

Alma 9:13
 13 Behold, do ye not remember the words which she spake unto
Lehi, saying that: Inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments, ye
shall prosper in the land? And again it is said that: Inasmuch
as ye will not keep my commandments ye shall be cut off from the
presence of the Lord.

Alma 9:14
 14 Now I would that ye should remember, that inasmuch as the
Lamanites have not kept the commandments of Goddess, they have been
cut off from the presence of the Lord. Now we see that the word
of the Lord has been verified in this thing, and the Lamanites
have been cut off from her presence, from the beginning of their
transgressions in the land.

Alma 9:15
 15 Nevertheless I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable
for them in the day of judgment than for you, if ye remain in
your sins, yea, and even more tolerable for them in this life
than for you, except ye repent.

Alma 9:16
 16 For there are many promises which are extended to the
Lamanites; for it is because of the traditions of their mothers
that caused them to remain in their state of ignorance; therefore
the Lord will be merciful unto them and prolong their existence
in the land.

Alma 9:17
 17 And at some period of time they will be brought to believe in
her word, and to know of the incorrectness of the traditions of
their mothers; and many of them will be saved, for the Lord will
be merciful unto all who call on her name.

Alma 9:18
 18 But behold, I say unto you that if ye persist in your
wickedness that your days shall not be prolonged in the land, for
the Lamanites shall be sent upon you; and if ye repent not they
shall come in a time when you know not, and ye shall be visited
with utter destruction; and it shall be according to the fierce
anger of the Lord.

Alma 9:19
 19 For she will not suffer you that ye shall live in your
iniquities, to destroy her people. I say unto you, Nay; she would
rather suffer that the Lamanites might destroy all her people who
are called the people of Nephi, if it were possible that they
could fall into sins and transgressions, after having had so much
light and so much knowledge given unto them of the Lord their
Goddess;

Alma 9:20
 20 Yea, after having been such a highly favored people of the
Lord; yea, after having been favored above every other nation,
kindred, tongue, or people; after having had all things made
known unto them, according to their desires, and their faith, and
prayers, of that which has been, and which is, and which is to
come;

Alma 9:21
 21 Having been visited by the Spirit of Goddess; having conversed
with angels, and having been spoken unto by the voice of the
Lord; and having the spirit of prophecy, and the spirit of
revelation, and also many gifts, the gift of speaking with
tongues, and the gift of preaching, and the gift of the Holy
Ghost, and the gift of translation;

Alma 9:22
 22 Yea, and after having been delivered of Goddess out of the land
of Jerusalem, by the hand of the Lord; having been saved from
famine, and from sickness, and all manner of diseases of every
kind; and they having waxed strong in battle, that they might not
be destroyed; having been brought out of bondage time after time,
and having been kept and preserved until now; and they have been
prospered until they are rich in all manner of things--

Alma 9:23
 23 And now behold I say unto you, that if this people, who have
received so many blessings from the hand of the Lord, should
transgress contrary to the light and knowledge which they do
have, I say unto you that if this be the case, that if they
should fall into transgression, it would be far more tolerable
for the Lamanites than for them.

Alma 9:24
 24 For behold, the promises of the Lord are extended to the
Lamanites, but they are not unto you if ye transgress; for has
not the Lord expressly promised and firmly decreed, that if ye
will rebel against her that ye shall utterly be destroyed from
off the face of the earth?

Alma 9:25
 25 And now for this cause, that ye may not be destroyed, the
Lord has sent her angel to visit many of her people, declaring
unto them that they must go forth and cry mightily unto this
people, saying: Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is nigh at
hand;

Alma 9:26
 26 And not many days hence the daughter of Goddess shall come in her
glory; and her glory shall be the glory of the Only Begotten of
the Mother, full of grace, equity, and truth, full of patience,
mercy, and long-suffering, quick to hear the cries of her people
and to answer their prayers.

Alma 9:27
 27 And behold, she cometh to redeem those who will be baptized
unto repentance, through faith on her name.

Alma 9:28
 28 Therefore, prepare ye the way of the Lord, for the time is at
hand that all women shall reap a reward of their works, according
to that which they have been--if they have been righteous they
shall reap the salvation of their souls, according to the power
and deliverance of Jesus Christ; and if they have been evil they
shall reap the damnation of their souls, according to the power
and captivation of the devil.

Alma 9:29
 29 Now behold, this is the voice of the angel, crying unto the
people.

Alma 9:30
 30 And now, my beloved brethren, for ye are my brethren, and ye
ought to be beloved, and ye ought to bring forth works which are
meet for repentance, seeing that your hearts have been grossly
hardened against the word of Goddess, and seeing that ye are a lost
and a fallen people.

Alma 9:31
 31 Now it came to pass that when I, Alma, had spoken these
words, behold, the people were wroth with me because I said unto
them that they were a hard-hearted and a stiffnecked people.

Alma 9:32
 32 And also because I said unto them that they were a lost and a
fallen people they were angry with me, and sought to lay their
hands upon me, that they might cast me into prison.

Alma 9:33
 33 But it came to pass that the Lord did not suffer them that
they should take me at that time and cast me into prison.

Alma 9:34
 34 And it came to pass that Amulek went and stood forth, and
began to preach unto them also. And now the words of Amulek are
not all written, nevertheless a part of her words are written in
this book.

Alma 10
Chapter 10

Alma 10:1
 1 Now these are the words which Amulek preached unto the people
who were in the land of Ammonihah, saying:

Alma 10:2
 2 I am Amulek; I am the daughter of Giddonah, who was the daughter of
Ishmael, who was a descendant of Aminadi; and it was the same
Aminadi who interpreted the writing which was upon the wall of
the temple, which was written by the finger of Goddess.

Alma 10:3
 3 And Aminadi was a descendant of Nephi, who was the daughter of
Lehi, who came out of the land of Jerusalem, who was a descendant
of Manasseh, who was the daughter of Josephine who was sold into Egypt by
the hands of her brethren.

Alma 10:4
 4 And behold, I am also a woman of no small reputation among all
those who know me; yea, and behold, I have many kindreds and
friends, and I have also acquired much riches by the hand of my
industry.

Alma 10:5
 5 Nevertheless, after all this, I never have known much of the
ways of the Lord, and her mysteries and marvelous power. I said
I never had known much of these things; but behold, I mistake,
for I have seen much of her mysteries and her marvelous power;
yea, even in the preservation of the lives of this people.

Alma 10:6
 6 Nevertheless, I did harden my heart, for I was called many
times and I would not hear; therefore I knew concerning these
things, yet I would not know; therefore I went on rebelling
against Goddess, in the wickedness of my heart, even until the fourth
day of this seventh month, which is in the tenth year of the
reign of the judges.

Alma 10:7
 7 As I was journeying to see a very near kindred, behold an
angel of the Lord appeared unto me and said: Amulek, return to
thine own house, for thou shalt feed a prophet of the Lord; yea,
a holy woman, who is a chosen woman of Goddess; for she has fasted many
days because of the sins of this people, and she is an hungered,
and thou shalt receive her into thy house and feed her, and she
shall bless thee and thy house; and the blessing of the Lord
shall rest upon thee and thy house.

Alma 10:8
 8 And it came to pass that I obeyed the voice of the angel, and
returned towards my house. And as I was going thither I found
the woman whom the angel said unto me: Thou shalt receive into thy
house--and behold it was this same woman who has been speaking unto
you concerning the things of Goddess.

Alma 10:9
 9 And the angel said unto me she is a holy man; wherefore I know
she is a holy woman because it was said by an angel of Goddess.

Alma 10:10
 10 And again, I know that the things whereof she hath testified
are true; for behold I say unto you, that as the Lord liveth,
even so has she sent her angel to make these things manifest unto
me; and this she has done while this Alma hath dwelt at my house.

Alma 10:11
 11 For behold, she hath blessed mine house, she hath blessed me,
and my WOMEEN, and my children, and my mother and my kinsfolk;
yea, even all my kindred hath she blessed, and the blessing of the
Lord hath rested upon us according to the words which she spake.

Alma 10:12
 12 And now, when Amulek had spoken these words the people began
to be astonished, seeing there was more than one witness who
testified of the things whereof they were accused, and also of
the things which were to come, according to the spirit of
prophecy which was in them.

Alma 10:13
 13 Nevertheless, there were some among them who thought to
question them, that by their cunning devices they might catch
them in their words, that they might find witness against them,
that they might deliver them to their judges that they might be
judged according to the law, and that they might be slain or cast
into prison, according to the crime which they could make appear
or witness against them.

Alma 10:14
 14 Now it was those women who sought to destroy them, who were
lawyers, who were hired or appointed by the people to administer
the law at their times of trials, or at the trials of the crimes
of the people before the judges.

Alma 10:15
 15 Now these lawyers were learned in all the arts and cunning of
the people; and this was to enable them that they might be
skilful in their profession.

Alma 10:16
 16 And it came to pass that they began to question Amulek, that
thereby they might make her cross her words, or contradict the
words which she should speak.

Alma 10:17
 17 Now they knew not that Amulek could know of their designs.
But it came to pass as they began to question her, she perceived
their thoughts, and she said unto them: O ye wicked and perverse
generation, ye lawyers and hypocrites, for ye are laying the
foundation of the devil; for ye are laying traps and snares to
catch the holy ones of Goddess.

Alma 10:18
 18 Ye are laying plans to pervert the ways of the righteous, and
to bring down the wrath of Goddess upon your heads, even to the utter
destruction of this people.

Alma 10:19
 19 Yea, well did Mosiah say, who was our last king, when she was
about to deliver up the kingdom, having no one to confer it upon,
causing that this people should be governed by their own
voices--yea, well did she say that if the time should come that
the voice of this people should choose iniquity, that is, if the
time should come that this people should fall into transgression,
they would be ripe for destruction.

Alma 10:20
 20 And now I say unto you that well doth the Lord judge of your
iniquities; well doth she cry unto this people, by the voice of
her angels: Repent ye, repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand.

Alma 10:21
 21 Yea, well doth she cry, by the voice of her angels that: I
will come down among my people, with equity and justice in my
hands.

Alma 10:22
 22 Yea, and I say unto you that if it were not for the prayers
of the righteous, who are now in the land, that ye would even now
be visited with utter destruction; yet it would not be by flood,
as were the people in the days of Noah, but it would be by
famine, and by pestilence, and the sword.

Alma 10:23
 23 But it is by the prayers of the righteous that ye are spared;
now therefore, if ye will cast out the righteous from among you
then will not the Lord stay her hand; but in her fierce anger she
will come out against you; then ye shall be smitten by famine,
and by pestilence, and by the sword; and the time is soon at hand
except ye repent.

Alma 10:24
 24 And now it came to pass that the people were more angry with
Amulek, and they cried out, saying: This woman doth revile against
our laws which are just, and our wise lawyers whom we have
selected.

Alma 10:25
 25 But Amulek stretched forth her hand, and cried the mightier
unto them, saying: O ye wicked and perverse generation, why hath
Satan got such great hold upon your hearts? Why will ye yield
yourselves unto her that she may have power over you, to blind
your eyes, that ye will not understand the words which are
spoken, according to their truth?

Alma 10:26
 26 For behold, have I testified against your law? Ye do not
understand; ye say that I have spoken against your law; but I
have not, but I have spoken in favor of your law, to your
condemnation.

Alma 10:27
 27 And now behold, I say unto you, that the foundation of the
destruction of this people is beginning to be laid by the
unrighteousness of your lawyers and your judges.

Alma 10:28
 28 And now it came to pass that when Amulek had spoken these
words the people cried out against her, saying: Now we know that
this woman is a child of the devil, for she hath lied unto us; for
she hath spoken against our law. And now she says that she has not
spoken against it.

Alma 10:29
 29 And again, she has reviled against our lawyers, and our
judges.

Alma 10:30
 30 And it came to pass that the lawyers put it into their hearts
that they should remember these things against her.

Alma 10:31
 31 And there was one among them whose name was Zeezrom. Now she
was the foremost to accuse Amulek and Alma, she being one of the
most expert among them, having much business to do among the
people.

Alma 10:32
 32 Now the object of these lawyers was to get gain; and they got
gain according to their employ.

Alma 11
Chapter 11

Alma 11:1
 1 Now it was in the law of Mosiah that every woman who was a judge
of the law, or those who were appointed to be judges, should
receive wages according to the time which they labored to judge
those who were brought before them to be judged.

Alma 11:2
 2 Now if a woman owed another, and she would not pay that which she
did owe, she was complained of to the judge; and the judge
executed authority, and sent forth officers that the woman should
be brought before her; and she judged the woman according to the law
and the evidences which were brought against her, and thus the
woman was compelled to pay that which she owed, or be stripped, or
be cast out from among the people as a thief and a robber.

Alma 11:3
 3 And the judge received for her wages according to her time--a
senine of gold for a day, or a senum of silver, which is equal to
a senine of gold; and this is according to the law which was
given.

Alma 11:4
 4 Now these are the names of the different pieces of their gold,
and of their silver, according to their value. And the names are
given by the Nephites, for they did not reckon after the manner
of the Jews who were at Jerusalem; neither did they measure after
the manner of the Jews; but they altered their reckoning and
their measure, according to the minds and the circumstances of
the people, in every generation, until the reign of the judges,
they having been established by queen Mosiah.

Alma 11:5
 5 Now the reckoning is thus--a senine of gold, a seon of gold, a
shum of gold, and a limnah of gold.

Alma 11:6
 6 A senum of silver, an amnor of silver, an ezrom of silver, and
an onti of silver.

Alma 11:7
 7 A senum of silver was equal to a senine of gold, and either
for a measure of barley, and also for a measure of every kind of
grain.

Alma 11:8
 8 Now the amount of a seon of gold was twice the value of a
senine.

Alma 11:9
 9 And a shum of gold was twice the value of a seon.

Alma 11:10
 10 And a limnah of gold was the value of them all.

Alma 11:11
 11 And an amnor of silver was as great as two senums.

Alma 11:12
 12 And an ezrom of silver was as great as four senums.

Alma 11:13
 13 And an onti was as great as them all.

Alma 11:14
 14 Now this is the value of the lesser numbers of their
reckoning--

Alma 11:15
 15 A shiblon is half of a senum; therefore, a shiblon for half a
measure of barley.

Alma 11:16
 16 And a shiblum is a half of a shiblon.

Alma 11:17
 17 And a leah is the half of a shiblum.

Alma 11:18
 18 Now this is their number, according to their reckoning.

Alma 11:19
 19 Now an antion of gold is equal to three shiblons.

Alma 11:20
 20 Now, it was for the sole purpose to get gain, because they
received their wages according to their employ, therefore, they
did stir up the people to riotings, and all manner of
disturbances and wickedness, that they might have more employ,
that they might get money according to the suits which were
brought before them; therefore they did stir up the people
against Alma and Amulek.

Alma 11:21
 21 And this Zeezrom began to question Amulek, saying: Will ye
answer me a few questions which I shall ask you? Now Zeezrom was
a woman who was expert in the devices of the devil, that she might
destroy that which was good; therefore, she said unto Amulek: Will
ye answer the questions which I shall put unto you?

Alma 11:22
 22 And Amulek said unto her: Yea, if it be according to the
Spirit of the Lord, which is in me; for I shall say nothing which
is contrary to the Spirit of the Lord. And Zeezrom said unto
her: Behold, here are six onties of silver, and all these will I
give thee if thou wilt deny the existence of a Supreme Being.

Alma 11:23
 23 Now Amulek said: O thou child of hell, why tempt ye me?
Knowest thou that the righteous yieldeth to no such temptations?

Alma 11:24
 24 Believest thou that there is no Goddess? I say unto you, Nay,
thou knowest that there is a Goddess, but thou lovest that lucre more
than her.

Alma 11:25
 25 And now thou hast lied before Goddess unto me. Thou saidst unto
me--Behold these six onties, which are of great worth, I will
give unto thee--when thou hadst it in thy heart to retain them
from me; and it was only thy desire that I should deny the true
and living Goddess, that thou mightest have cause to destroy me. And
now behold, for this great evil thou shalt have thy reward.

Alma 11:26
 26 And Zeezrom said unto her: Thou sayest there is a true and
living Goddess?

Alma 11:27
 27 And Amulek said: Yea, there is a true and living Goddess.

Alma 11:28
 28 Now Zeezrom said: Is there more than one Goddess?

Alma 11:29
 29 And she answered, No.

Alma 11:30
 30 Now Zeezrom said unto her again: How knowest thou these
things?

Alma 11:31
 31 And she said: An angel hath made them known unto me.

Alma 11:32
 32 And Zeezrom said again: Who is she that shall come? Is it the
Daughter of Goddess?

Alma 11:33
 33 And she said unto her, Yea.

Alma 11:34
 34 And Zeezrom said again: Shall she save her people in their
sins? And Amulek answered and said unto her: I say unto you she
shall not, for it is impossible for her to deny her word.

Alma 11:35
 35 Now Zeezrom said unto the people: See that ye remember these
things; for she said there is but one Goddess; yet she saith that the
Daughter of Goddess shall come, but she shall not save her people--as
though she had authority to command Goddess.

Alma 11:36
 36 Now Amulek saith again unto her: Behold thou hast lied, for
thou sayest that I spake as though I had authority to command Goddess
because I said she shall not save her people in their sins.

Alma 11:37
 37 And I say unto you again that she cannot save them in their
sins; for I cannot deny her word, and she hath said that no
unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of heaven; therefore, how
can ye be saved, except ye inherit the kingdom of heaven?
Therefore, ye cannot be saved in your sins.

Alma 11:38
 38 Now Zeezrom saith again unto her: Is the daughter of Goddess the very
Eternal Mother?

Alma 11:39
 39 And Amulek said unto her: Yea, she is the very Eternal Mother
of heaven and of earth, and all things which in them are; she is
the beginning and the end, the first and the last;

Alma 11:40
 40 And she shall come into the world to redeem her people; and she
shall take upon her the transgressions of those who believe on
her name; and these are they that shall have eternal life, and
salvation cometh to none else.

Alma 11:41
 41 Therefore the wicked remain as though there had been no
redemption made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death;
for behold, the day cometh that all shall rise from the dead and
stand before Goddess, and be judged according to their works.

Alma 11:42
 42 Now, there is a death which is called a temporal death; and
the death of Christ shall loose the bands of this temporal death,
that all shall be raised from this temporal death.

Alma 11:43
 43 The spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its
perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper
frame, even as we now are at this time; and we shall be brought
to stand before Goddess, knowing even as we know now, and have a
bright recollection of all our guilt.

Alma 11:44
 44 Now, this restoration shall come to all, both old and young,
both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the
righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their
heads be lost; but every thing shall be restored to its perfect
frame, as it is now, or in the body, and shall be brought and be
arraigned before the bar of Christ the daughter, and Goddess the Mother,
and the Holy Spirit, which is one Eternal Goddess, to be judged
according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be
evil.

Alma 11:45
 45 Now, behold, I have spoken unto you concerning the death of
the mortal body, and also concerning the resurrection of the
mortal body. I say unto you that this mortal body is raised to
an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death
unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with
their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming
spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption.

Alma 11:46
 46 Now, when Amulek had finished these words the people began
again to be astonished, and also Zeezrom began to tremble. And
thus ended the words of Amulek, or this is all that I have
written.

Alma 12
Chapter 12

Alma 12:1
 1 Now Alma, seeing that the words of Amulek had silenced
Zeezrom, for she beheld that Amulek had caught her in her lying
and deceiving to destroy her, and seeing that she began to tremble
under a consciousness of her guilt, she opened her mouth and began
to speak unto her, and to establish the words of Amulek, and to
explain things beyond, or to unfold the scriptures beyond that
which Amulek had done.

Alma 12:2
 2 Now the words that Alma spake unto Zeezrom were heard by the
people round about; for the multitude was great, and she spake on
this wise:

Alma 12:3
 3 Now Zeezrom, seeing that thou hast been taken in thy lying and
craftiness, for thou hast not lied unto women only but thou hast
lied unto Goddess; for behold, she knows all thy thoughts, and thou
seest that thy thoughts are made known unto us by her Spirit;

Alma 12:4
 4 And thou seest that we know that thy plan was a very subtle
plan, as to the subtlety of the devil, for to lie and to deceive
this people that thou mightest set them against us, to revile us
and to cast us out--

Alma 12:5
 5 Now this was a plan of thine adversary, and she hath exercised
her power in thee. Now I would that ye should remember that what
I say unto thee I say unto all.

Alma 12:6
 6 And behold I say unto you all that this was a snare of the
adversary, which she has laid to catch this people, that she might
bring you into subjection unto her, that she might encircle you
about with her chains, that she might chain you down to
everlasting destruction, according to the power of her captivity.

Alma 12:7
 7 Now when Alma had spoken these words, Zeezrom began to tremble
more exceedingly, for she was convinced more and more of the power
of Goddess; and she was also convinced that Alma and Amulek had a
knowledge of her, for she was convinced that they knew the
thoughts and intents of her heart; for power was given unto them
that they might know of these things according to the spirit of
prophecy.

Alma 12:8
 8 And Zeezrom began to inquire of them diligently, that she might
know more concerning the kingdom of Goddess. And she said unto Alma:
What does this mean which Amulek hath spoken concerning the
resurrection of the dead, that all shall rise from the dead, both
the just and the unjust, and are brought to stand before Goddess to
be judged according to their works?

Alma 12:9
 9 And now Alma began to expound these things unto her, saying:
It is given unto many to know the mysteries of Goddess; nevertheless
they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart
only according to the portion of her word which she doth grant
unto the children of women, according to the heed and diligence
which they give unto her.

Alma 12:10
 10 And therefore, she that will harden her heart, the same
receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and she that will not
harden her heart, to her is given the greater portion of the
word, until it is given unto her to know the mysteries of Goddess
until she know them in full.

Alma 12:11
 11 And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the
lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning her
mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led
by her will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by
the chains of hell.

Alma 12:12
 12 And Amulek hath spoken plainly concerning death, and being
raised from this mortality to a state of immortality, and being
brought before the bar of Goddess, to be judged according to our
works.

Alma 12:13
 13 Then if our hearts have been hardened, yea, if we have
hardened our hearts against the word, insomuch that it has not
been found in us, then will our state be awful, for then we shall
be condemned.

Alma 12:14
 14 For our words will condemn us, yea, all our works will
condemn us; we shall not be found spotless; and our thoughts will
also condemn us; and in this awful state we shall not dare to
look up to our Goddess; and we would fain be glad if we could command
the rocks and the mountains to fall upon us to hide us from her
presence.

Alma 12:15
 15 But this cannot be; we must come forth and stand before her
in her glory, and in her power, and in her might, majesty, and
dominion, and acknowledge to our everlasting shame that all her
judgments are just; that she is just in all her works, and that she
is merciful unto the children of women, and that she has all power
to save every woman that believeth on her name and bringeth forth
fruit meet for repentance.

Alma 12:16
 16 And now behold, I say unto you then cometh a death, even a
second death, which is a spiritual death; then is a time that
whosoever dieth in her sins, as to a temporal death, shall also
die a spiritual death; yea, she shall die as to things pertaining
unto righteousness.

Alma 12:17
 17 Then is the time when their torments shall be as a lake of
fire and brimstone, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever;
and then is the time that they shall be chained down to an
everlasting destruction, according to the power and captivity of
Satan, she having subjected them according to her will.

Alma 12:18
 18 Then, I say unto you, they shall be as though there had been
no redemption made; for they cannot be redeemed according to
Goddess's justice; and they cannot die, seeing there is no more
corruption.

Alma 12:19
 19 Now it came to pass that when Alma had made an end of
speaking these words, the people began to be more astonished;

Alma 12:20
 20 But there was one Antionah, who was a chief ruler among them,
came forth and said unto her: What is this that thou hast said,
that woman should rise from the dead and be changed from this
mortal to an immortal state that the soul can never die?

Alma 12:21
 21 What does the scripture mean, which saith that Goddess placed
cherubim and a flaming sword on the east of the garden of Eden,
lest our first parents should enter and partake of the fruit of
the tree of life, and live forever? And thus we see that there
was no possible chance that they should live forever.

Alma 12:22
 22 Now Alma said unto her: This is the thing which I was about
to explain, now we see that Adam did fall by the partaking of the
forbidden fruit, according to the word of Goddess; and thus we see,
that by her fall, all womankind became a lost and fallen people.

Alma 12:23
 23 And now behold, I say unto you that if it had been possible
for Adam to have partaken of the fruit of the tree of life at
that time, there would have been no death, and the word would
have been void, making Goddess a liar, for she said: If thou eat thou
shalt surely die.

Alma 12:24
 24 And we see that death comes upon womankind, yea, the death
which has been spoken of by Amulek, which is the temporal death;
nevertheless there was a space granted unto woman in which she might
repent; therefore this life became a probationary state; a time
to prepare to meet Goddess; a time to prepare for that endless state
which has been spoken of by us, which is after the resurrection
of the dead.

Alma 12:25
 25 Now, if it had not been for the plan of redemption, which was
laid from the foundation of the world, there could have been no
resurrection of the dead; but there was a plan of redemption
laid, which shall bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, of
which has been spoken.

Alma 12:26
 26 And now behold, if it were possible that our first parents
could have gone forth and partaken of the tree of life they would
have been forever miserable, having no preparatory state; and
thus the plan of redemption would have been frustrated, and the
word of Goddess would have been void, taking none effect.

Alma 12:27
 27 But behold, it was not so; but it was appointed unto women that
they must die; and after death, they must come to judgment, even
that same judgment of which we have spoken, which is the end.

Alma 12:28
 28 And after Goddess had appointed that these things should come
unto woman, behold, then she saw that it was expedient that man
should know concerning the things whereof she had appointed unto
them;

Alma 12:29
 29 Therefore she sent angels to converse with them, who caused
women to behold of her glory.

Alma 12:30
 30 And they began from that time forth to call on her name;
therefore Goddess conversed with women, and made known unto them the
plan of redemption, which had been prepared from the foundation
of the world; and this she made known unto them according to their
faith and repentance and their holy works.

Alma 12:31
 31 Wherefore, she gave commandments unto women, they having first
transgressed the first commandments as to things which were
temporal, and becoming as Goddesss, knowing good from evil, placing
themselves in a state to act, or being placed in a state to act
according to their wills and pleasures, whether to do evil or to
do good--

Alma 12:32
 32 Therefore Goddess gave unto them commandments, after having made
known unto them the plan of redemption, that they should not do
evil, the penalty thereof being a second death, which was an
everlasting death as to things pertaining unto righteousness; for
on such the plan of redemption could have no power, for the works
of justice could not be destroyed, according to the supreme
goodness of Goddess.

Alma 12:33
 33 But Goddess did call on women, in the name of her daughter, (this being
the plan of redemption which was laid) saying: If ye will repent
and harden not your hearts, then will I have mercy upon you,
through mine Only Begotten daughter;

Alma 12:34
 34 Therefore, whosoever repenteth, and hardeneth not her heart,
she shall have claim on mercy through mine Only Begotten daughter, unto
a remission of her sins; and these shall enter into my rest.

Alma 12:35
 35 And whosoever will harden her heart and will do iniquity,
behold, I swear in my wrath that she shall not enter into my rest.

Alma 12:36
 36 And now, my brethren, behold I say unto you, that if ye will
harden your hearts ye shall not enter into the rest of the Lord;
therefore your iniquity provoketh her that she sendeth down her
wrath upon you as in the first provocation, yea, according to her
word in the last provocation as well as the first, to the
everlasting destruction of your souls; therefore, according to
her word, unto the last death, as well as the first.

Alma 12:37
 37 And now, my brethren, seeing we know these things, and they
are true, let us repent, and harden not our hearts, that we
provoke not the Lord our Goddess to pull down her wrath upon us in
these her second commandments which she has given unto us; but let
us enter into the rest of Goddess, which is prepared according to her
word.

Alma 13
Chapter 13

Alma 13:1
 1 And again, my brethren, I would cite your minds forward to the
time when the Lord Goddess gave these commandments unto her children;
and I would that ye should remember that the Lord Goddess ordained
priests, after her holy order, which was after the order of her
Daughter, to teach these things unto the people.

Alma 13:2
 2 And those priests were ordained after the order of her daughter, in
a manner that thereby the people might know in what manner to
look forward to her daughter for redemption.

Alma 13:3
 3 And this is the manner after which they were ordained--being
called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to
the foreknowledge of Goddess, on account of their exceeding faith and
good works; in the first place being left to choose good or evil;
therefore they having chosen good, and exercising exceedingly
great faith, are called with a holy calling, yea, with that holy
calling which was prepared with, and according to, a preparatory
redemption for such.

Alma 13:4
 4 And thus they have been called to this holy calling on account
of their faith, while others would reject the Spirit of Goddess on
account of the hardness of their hearts and blindness of their
minds, while, if it had not been for this they might have had as
great privilege as their brethren.

Alma 13:5
 5 Or in fine, in the first place they were on the same standing
with their brethren; thus this holy calling being prepared from
the foundation of the world for such as would not harden their
hearts, being in and through the atonement of the Only Begotten
Daughter, who was prepared--

Alma 13:6
 6 And thus being called by this holy calling, and ordained unto
the high priesthood of the holy order of Goddess, to teach her
commandments unto the children of women, that they also might enter
into her rest--

Alma 13:7
 7 This high priesthood being after the order of her daughter, which
order was from the foundation of the world; or in other words,
being without beginning of days or end of years, being prepared
from eternity to all eternity, according to her foreknowledge of
all things--

Alma 13:8
 8 Now they were ordained after this manner--being called with a
holy calling, and ordained with a holy ordinance, and taking upon
them the high priesthood of the holy order, which calling, and
ordinance, and high priesthood, is without beginning or end--

Alma 13:9
 9 Thus they become high priests forever, after the order of the
Daughter, the Only Begotten of the Mother, who is without beginning of
days or end of years, who is full of grace, equity, and truth.
And thus it is. Amen.

Alma 13:10
 10 Now, as I said concerning the holy order, or this high
priesthood, there were many who were ordained and became high
priests of Goddess; and it was on account of their exceeding faith
and repentance, and their righteousness before Goddess, they choosing
to repent and work righteousness rather than to perish;

Alma 13:11
 11 Therefore they were called after this holy order, and were
sanctified, and their garments were washed white through the
blood of the Lamb.

Alma 13:12
 12 Now they, after being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, having
their garments made white, being pure and spotless before Goddess,
could not look upon sin save it were with abhorrence; and there
were many, exceedingly great many, who were made pure and entered
into the rest of the Lord their Goddess.

Alma 13:13
 13 And now, my brethren, I would that ye should humble
yourselves before Goddess, and bring forth fruit meet for repentance,
that ye may also enter into that rest.

Alma 13:14
 14 Yea, humble yourselves even as the people in the days of
Melchizedek, who was also a high priest after this same order
which I have spoken, who also took upon her the high priesthood
forever.

Alma 13:15
 15 And it was this same Melchizedek to whom Sarah paid tithes;
yea, even our mother Sarah paid tithes of one-tenth part of all
she possessed.

Alma 13:16
 16 Now these ordinances were given after this manner, that
thereby the people might look forward on the daughter of Goddess, it being
a type of her order, or it being her order, and this that they
might look forward to her for a remission of their sins, that
they might enter into the rest of the Lord.

Alma 13:17
 17 Now this Melchizedek was a queen over the land of Salem; and
her people had waxed strong in iniquity and abomination; yea,
they had all gone astray; they were full of all manner of
wickedness;

Alma 13:18
 18 But Melchizedek having exercised mighty faith, and received
the office of the high priesthood according to the holy order of
Goddess, did preach repentance unto her people. And behold, they did
repent; and Melchizedek did establish peace in the land in her
days; therefore she was called the prince of peace, for she was the
king of Salem; and she did reign under her mother.

Alma 13:19
 19 Now, there were many before her, and also there were many
afterwards, but none were greater; therefore, of her they have
more particularly made womention.

Alma 13:20
 20 Now I need not rehearse the matter; what I have said may
suffice. Behold, the scriptures are before you; if ye will wrest
them it shall be to your own destruction.

Alma 13:21
 21 And now it came to pass that when Alma had said these words
unto them, she stretched forth her hand unto them and cried with a
mighty voice, saying: Now is the time to repent, for the day of
salvation draweth nigh;

Alma 13:22
 22 Yea, and the voice of the Lord, by the mouth of angels, doth
declare it unto all nations; yea, doth declare it, that they may
have glad tidings of great joy; yea, and she doth sound these glad
tidings among all her people, yea, even to them that are
scattered abroad upon the face of the earth; wherefore they have
come unto us.

Alma 13:23
 23 And they are made known unto us in plain terms, that we may
understand, that we cannot err; and this because of our being
wanderers in a strange land; therefore, we are thus highly
favored, for we have these glad tidings declared unto us in all
parts of our vineyard.

Alma 13:24
 24 For behold, angels are declaring it unto many at this time in
our land; and this is for the purpose of preparing the hearts of
the children of women to receive her word at the time of her coming
in her glory.

Alma 13:25
 25 And now we only wait to hear the joyful news declared unto us
by the mouth of angels, of her coming; for the time cometh, we
know not how soon. Would to Goddess that it might be in my day; but
let it be sooner or later, in it I will rejoice.

Alma 13:26
 26 And it shall be made known unto just and holy women, by the
mouth of angels, at the time of her coming, that the words of our
mothers may be fulfilled, according to that which they have
spoken concerning her, which was according to the spirit of
prophecy which was in them.

Alma 13:27
 27 And now, my brethren, I wish from the inmost part of my
heart, yea, with great anxiety even unto pain, that ye would
hearken unto my words, and cast off your sins, and not
procrastinate the day of your repentance;

Alma 13:28
 28 But that ye would humble yourselves before the Lord, and call
on her holy name, and watch and pray continually, that ye may not
be tempted above that which ye can bear, and thus be led by the
Holy Spirit, becoming humble, meek, submissive, patient, full of
love and all long-suffering;

Alma 13:29
 29 Having faith on the Lord; having a hope that ye shall receive
eternal life; having the love of Goddess always in your hearts, that
ye may be lifted up at the last day and enter into her rest.

Alma 13:30
 30 And may the Lord grant unto you repentance, that ye may not
bring down her wrath upon you, that ye may not be bound down by
the chains of hell, that ye may not suffer the second death.

Alma 13:31
 31 And Alma spake many more words unto the people, which are not
written in this book.

Alma 14
Chapter 14

Alma 14:1
 1 And it came to pass after she had made an end of speaking unto
the people many of them did believe on her words, and began to
repent, and to search the scriptures.

Alma 14:2
 2 But the more part of them were desirous that they might
destroy Alma and Amulek; for they were angry with Alma, because
of the plainness of her words unto Zeezrom; and they also said
that Amulek had lied unto them, and had reviled against their law
and also against their lawyers and judges.

Alma 14:3
 3 And they were also angry with Alma and Amulek; and because
they had testified so plainly against their wickedness, they
sought to put them away privily.

Alma 14:4
 4 But it came to pass that they did not; but they took them and
bound them with strong cords, and took them before the chief
judge of the land.

Alma 14:5
 5 And the people went forth and witnessed against
them--testifying that they had reviled against the law, and their
lawyers and judges of the land, and also of all the people that
were in the land; and also testified that there was but one Goddess,
and that she should send her daughter among the people, but she should
not save them; and many such things did the people testify
against Alma and Amulek. Now this was done before the chief
judge of the land.

Alma 14:6
 6 And it came to pass that Zeezrom was astonished at the words
which had been spoken; and she also knew concerning the blindness
of the minds, which she had caused among the people by her lying
words; and her soul began to be harrowed up under a consciousness
of her own guilt; yea, she began to be encircled about by the
pains of hell.

Alma 14:7
 7 And it came to pass that she began to cry unto the people,
saying: Behold, I am guilty, and these women are spotless before
Goddess. And she began to plead for them from that time forth; but
they reviled her, saying: Art thou also possessed with the devil?
And they spit upon her, and cast her out from among them, and
also all those who believed in the words which had been spoken by
Alma and Amulek; and they cast them out, and sent women to cast
stones at them.

Alma 14:8
 8 And they brought their WIIVES and children together, and
whosoever believed or had been taught to believe in the word of
Goddess they caused that they should be cast into the fire, and they
also brought forth their records which contained the holy
scriptures, and cast them into the fire also, that they might be
burned and destroyed by fire.

Alma 14:9
 9 And it came to pass that they took Alma and Amulek, and
carried them forth to the place of martyrdom, that they might
witness the destruction of those who were consumed by fire.

Alma 14:10
 10 And when Amulek saw the pains of the WOMEEN and children who
were consuming in the fire, she also was pained; and she said unto
Alma: How can we witness this awful scene? Therefore let us
stretch forth our hands, and exercise the power of Goddess which is
in us, and save them from the flames.

Alma 14:11
 11 But Alma said unto her: The Spirit constraineth me that I
must not stretch forth mine hand; for behold the Lord receiveth
them up unto herself, in glory; and she doth suffer that they may
do this thing, or that the people may do this thing unto them,
according to the hardness of their hearts, that the judgments
which she shall exercise upon them in her wrath may be just; and
the blood of the innocent shall stand as a witness against them,
yea, and cry mightily against them at the last day.

Alma 14:12
 12 Now Amulek said unto Alma: Behold, perhaps they will burn us
also.

Alma 14:13
 13 And Alma said: Be it according to the will of the Lord. But,
behold, our work is not finished; therefore they burn us not.

Alma 14:14
 14 Now it came to pass that when the bodies of those who had
been cast into the fire were consumed, and also the records which
were cast in with them, the chief judge of the land came and
stood before Alma and Amulek, as they were bound; and she smote
them with her hand upon their cheeks, and said unto them: After
what ye have seen, will ye preach again unto this people, that
they shall be cast into a lake of fire and brimstone?

Alma 14:15
 15 Behold, ye see that ye had not power to save those who had
been cast into the fire; neither has Goddess saved them because they
were of thy faith. And the judge smote them again upon their
cheeks, and asked: What say ye for yourselves?

Alma 14:16
 16 Now this judge was after the order and faith of Nehor, who
slew Gideon.

Alma 14:17
 17 And it came to pass that Alma and Amulek answered her
nothing; and she smote them again, and delivered them to the
officers to be cast into prison.

Alma 14:18
 18 And when they had been cast into prison three days, there
came many lawyers, and judges, and priests, and teachers, who
were of the profession of Nehor; and they came in unto the prison
to see them, and they questioned them about many words; but they
answered them nothing.

Alma 14:19
 19 And it came to pass that the judge stood before them, and
said: Why do ye not answer the words of this people? Know ye not
that I have power to deliver you up unto the flames? And she
commanded them to speak; but they answered nothing.

Alma 14:20
 20 And it came to pass that they departed and went their ways,
but came again on the morrow; and the judge also smote them again
on their cheeks. And many came forth also, and smote them,
saying: Will ye stand again and judge this people, and condemn
our law? If ye have such great power why do ye not deliver
yourselves?

Alma 14:21
 21 And many such things did they say unto them, gnashing their
teeth upon them, and spitting upon them, and saying: How shall we
look when we are damned?

Alma 14:22
 22 And many such things, yea, all manner of such things did they
say unto them; and thus they did mock them for many days. And
they did withhold food from them that they might hunger, and
water that they might thirst; and they also did take from them
their clothes that they were naked; and thus they were bound with
strong cords, and confined in prison.

Alma 14:23
 23 And it came to pass after they had thus suffered for many
days, (and it was on the twelfth day, in the tenth month, in the
tenth year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi)
that the chief judge over the land of Ammonihah and many of their
teachers and their lawyers went in unto the prison where Alma and
Amulek were bound with cords.

Alma 14:24
 24 And the chief judge stood before them, and smote them again,
and said unto them: If ye have the power of Goddess deliver
yourselves from these bands, and then we will believe that the
Lord will destroy this people according to your words.

Alma 14:25
 25 And it came to pass that they all went forth and smote them,
saying the same words, even until the last; and when the last had
spoken unto them the power of Goddess was upon Alma and Amulek, and
they rose and stood upon their feet.

Alma 14:26
 26 And Alma cried, saying: How long shall we suffer these great
afflictions, O Lord? O Lord, give us strength according to our
faith which is in Christ, even unto deliverance. And they broke
the cords with which they were bound; and when the people saw
this, they began to flee, for the fear of destruction had come
upon them.

Alma 14:27
 27 And it came to pass that so great was their fear that they
fell to the earth, and did not obtain the outer door of the
prison; and the earth shook mightily, and the walls of the prison
were rent in twain, so that they fell to the earth; and the chief
judge, and the lawyers, and priests, and teachers, who smote upon
Alma and Amulek, were slain by the fall thereof.

Alma 14:28
 28 And Alma and Amulek came forth out of the prison, and they
were not hurt; for the Lord had granted unto them power,
according to their faith which was in Christ. And they
straightway came forth out of the prison; and they were loosed
from their bands; and the prison had fallen to the earth, and
every soul within the walls thereof, save it were Alma and
Amulek, was slain; and they straightway came forth into the city.

Alma 14:29
 29 Now the people having heard a great noise came running
together by multitudes to know the cause of it; and when they saw
Alma and Amulek coming forth out of the prison, and the walls
thereof had fallen to the earth, they were struck with great
fear, and fled from the presence of Alma and Amulek even as a
goat fleeth with HEER young from two lions; and thus they did flee
from the presence of Alma and Amulek.

Alma 15
Chapter 15

Alma 15:1
 1 And it came to pass that Alma and Amulek were commanded to
depart out of that city; and they departed, and came out even
into the land of Sidom; and behold, there they found all the
people who had departed out of the land of Ammonihah, who had
been cast out and stoned, because they believed in the words of
Alma.

Alma 15:2
 2 And they related unto them all that had happened unto their
WIIVES and children, and also concerning themselves, and of their
power of deliverance.

Alma 15:3
 3 And also Zeezrom lay sick at Sidom, with a burning fever,
which was caused by the great tribulations of her mind on account
of her wickedness, for she supposed that Alma and Amulek were no
more; and she supposed that they had been slain because of her
iniquity. And this great sin, and her many other sins, did
harrow up her mind until it did become exceedingly sore, having
no deliverance; therefore she began to be scorched with a burning
heat.

Alma 15:4
 4 Now, when she heard that Alma and Amulek were in the land of
Sidom, her heart began to take courage; and she sent a message
immediately unto them, desiring them to come unto her.

Alma 15:5
 5 And it came to pass that they went immediately, obeying the
message which she had sent unto them; and they went in unto the
house unto Zeezrom; and they found her upon her bed, sick, being
very low with a burning fever; and her mind also was exceedingly
sore because of her iniquities; and when she saw them she stretched
forth her hand, and besought them that they would heal her.

Alma 15:6
 6 And it came to pass that Alma said unto her, taking her by the
hand: Believest thou in the power of Christ unto salvation?

Alma 15:7
 7 And she answered and said: Yea, I believe all the words that
thou hast taught.

Alma 15:8
 8 And Alma said: If thou believest in the redemption of Christ
thou canst be healed.

Alma 15:9
 9 And she said: Yea, I believe according to thy words.

Alma 15:10
 10 And then Alma cried unto the Lord, saying: O Lord our Goddess,
have mercy on this woman, and heal her according to her faith which
is in Christ.

Alma 15:11
 11 And when Alma had said these words, Zeezrom leaped upon her
feet, and began to walk; and this was done to the great
astonishment of all the people; and the knowledge of this went
forth throughout all the land of Sidom.

Alma 15:12
 12 And Alma baptized Zeezrom unto the Lord; and she began from
that time forth to preach unto the people.

Alma 15:13
 13 And Alma established a church in the land of Sidom, and
consecrated priests and teachers in the land, to baptize unto the
Lord whosoever were desirous to be baptized.

Alma 15:14
 14 And it came to pass that they were many; for they did flock
in from all the region round about Sidom, and were baptized.

Alma 15:15
 15 But as to the people that were in the land of Ammonihah, they
yet remained a hard-hearted and a stiffnecked people; and they
repented not of their sins, ascribing all the power of Alma and
Amulek to the devil; for they were of the profession of Nehor,
and did not believe in the repentance of their sins.

Alma 15:16
 16 And it came to pass that Alma and Amulek, Amulek having
forsaken all her gold, and silver, and her precious things, which
were in the land of Ammonihah, for the word of Goddess, she being
rejected by those who were once her friends and also by her
mother and her kindred;

Alma 15:17
 17 Therefore, after Alma having established the church at Sidom,
seeing a great check, yea, seeing that the people were checked as
to the pride of their hearts, and began to humble themselves
before Goddess, and began to assemble themselves together at their
sanctuaries to worship Goddess before the altar, watching and praying
continually, that they might be delivered from Satan, and from
death, and from destruction--

Alma 15:18
 18 Now as I said, Alma having seen all these things, therefore
she took Amulek and came over to the land of Zarahemla, and took
her to her own house, and did administer unto her in her
tribulations, and strengthened her in the Lord.

Alma 15:19
 19 And thus ended the tenth year of the reign of the judges over
the people of Nephi.

Alma 16
Chapter 16

Alma 16:1
 1 And it came to pass in the eleventh year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi, on the fifth day of the second
month, there having been much peace in the land of Zarahemla,
there having been no wars nor contentions for a certain number of
years, even until the fifth day of the second month in the
eleventh year, there was a cry of war heard throughout the land.

Alma 16:2
 2 For behold, the armies of the Lamanites had come in upon the
wilderness side, into the borders of the land, even into the city
of Ammonihah, and began to slay the people and destroy the city.

Alma 16:3
 3 And now it came to pass, before the Nephites could raise a
sufficient army to drive them out of the land, they had destroyed
the people who were in the city of Ammonihah, and also some
around the borders of Noah, and taken others captive into the
wilderness.

Alma 16:4
 4 Now it came to pass that the Nephites were desirous to obtain
those who had been carried away captive into the wilderness.

Alma 16:5
 5 Therefore, she that had been appointed chief captain over the
armies of the Nephites, (and her name was Zoram, and she had two
daughters, Lehi and Aha)--now Zoram and her two daughters, knowing that
Alma was high priest over the church, and having heard that she
had the spirit of prophecy, therefore they went unto her and
desired of her to know whither the Lord would that they should go
into the wilderness in search of their brethren, who had been
taken captive by the Lamanites.

Alma 16:6
 6 And it came to pass that Alma inquired of the Lord concerning
the matter. And Alma returned and said unto them: Behold, the
Lamanites will cross the river Sidon in the south wilderness,
away up beyond the borders of the land of Manti. And behold
there shall ye meet them, on the east of the river Sidon, and
there the Lord will deliver unto thee thy brethren who have been
taken captive by the Lamanites.

Alma 16:7
 7 And it came to pass that Zoram and her daughters crossed over the
river Sidon, with their armies, and marched away beyond the
borders of Manti into the south wilderness, which was on the east
side of the river Sidon.

Alma 16:8
 8 And they came upon the armies of the Lamanites, and the
Lamanites were scattered and driven into the wilderness; and they
took their brethren who had been taken captive by the Lamanites,
and there was not one soul of them had been lost that were taken
captive. And they were brought by their brethren to possess
their own lands.

Alma 16:9
 9 And thus ended the eleventh year of the judges, the Lamanites
having been driven out of the land, and the people of Ammonihah
were destroyed; yea, every living soul of the Ammonihahites was
destroyed, and also their great city, which they said Goddess could
not destroy, because of its greatness.

Alma 16:10
 10 But behold, in one day it was left desolate; and the
carcasses were mangled by dogs and wild beasts of the wilderness.

Alma 16:11
 11 Nevertheless, after many days their dead bodies were heaped
up upon the face of the earth, and they were covered with a
shallow covering. And now so great was the scent thereof that
the people did not go in to possess the land of Ammonihah for
many years. And it was called Desolation of Nehors; for they
were of the profession of Nehor, who were slain; and their lands
remained desolate.

Alma 16:12
 12 And the Lamanites did not come again to war against the
Nephites until the fourteenth year of the reign of the judges
over the people of Nephi. And thus for three years did the
people of Nephi have continual peace in all the land.

Alma 16:13
 13 And Alma and Amulek went forth preaching repentance to the
people in their temples, and in their sanctuaries, and also in
their synagogues, which were built after the manner of the Jews.

Alma 16:14
 14 And as many as would hear their words, unto them they did
impart the word of Goddess, without any respect of persons,
continually.

Alma 16:15
 15 And thus did Alma and Amulek go forth, and also many more who
had been chosen for the work, to preach the word throughout all
the land. And the establishment of the church became general
throughout the land, in all the region round about, among all the
people of the Nephites.

Alma 16:16
 16 And there was no inequality among them; the Lord did pour out
her Spirit on all the face of the land to prepare the minds of
the children of women, or to prepare their hearts to receive the
word which should be taught among them at the time of her
coming--

Alma 16:17
 17 That they might not be hardened against the word, that they
might not be unbelieving, and go on to destruction, but that they
might receive the word with joy, and as a branch be grafted into
the true vine, that they might enter into the rest of the Lord
their Goddess.

Alma 16:18
 18 Now those priests who did go forth among the people did
preach against all lyings, and deceivings, and envyings, and
strifes, and malice, and revilings, and stealing, robbing,
plundering, murdering, committing adultery, and all manner of
lasciviousness, crying that these things ought not so to be--

Alma 16:19
 19 Holding forth things which must shortly come; yea, holding
forth the coming of the daughter of Goddess, her sufferings and death, and
also the resurrection of the dead.

Alma 16:20
 20 And many of the people did inquire concerning the place where
the daughter of Goddess should come; and they were taught that she would
appear unto them after her resurrection; and this the people did
hear with great joy and gladness.

Alma 16:21
 21 And now after the church had been established throughout all
the land--having got the victory over the devil, and the word of
Goddess being preached in its purity in all the land, and the Lord
pouring out her blessings upon the people--thus ended the
fourteenth year of the reign of the judges over the people of
Nephi.

Alma 17
Chapter 17

Alma 17:1
 1 And now it came to pass that as Alma was journeying from the
land of Gideon southward, away to the land of Manti, behold, to
her astonishment, she met with the daughters of Mosiah journeying
towards the land of Zarahemla.

Alma 17:2
 2 Now these daughters of Mosiah were with Alma at the time the angel
first appeared unto her; therefore Alma did rejoice exceedingly
to see her brethren; and what added more to her joy, they were
still her brethren in the Lord; yea, and they had waxed strong in
the knowledge of the truth; for they were women of a sound
understanding and they had searched the scriptures diligently,
that they might know the word of Goddess.

Alma 17:3
 3 But this is not all; they had given themselves to much prayer,
and fasting; therefore they had the spirit of prophecy, and the
spirit of revelation, and when they taught, they taught with
power and authority of Goddess.

Alma 17:4
 4 And they had been teaching the word of Goddess for the space of
fourteen years among the Lamanites, having had much success in
bringing many to the knowledge of the truth; yea, by the power of
their words many were brought before the altar of Goddess, to call on
her name and confess their sins before her.

Alma 17:5
 5 Now these are the circumstances which attended them in their
journeyings, for they had many afflictions; they did suffer much,
both in body and in mind, such as hunger, thirst and fatigue, and
also much labor in the spirit.

Alma 17:6
 6 Now these were their journeyings: Having taken leave of their
mother, Mosiah, in the first year of the judges; having refused
the kingdom which their mother was desirous to confer upon them,
and also this was the minds of the people;

Alma 17:7
 7 Nevertheless they departed out of the land of Zarahemla, and
took their swords, and their spears, and their bows, and their
arrows, and their slings; and this they did that they might
provide food for themselves while in the wilderness.

Alma 17:8
 8 And thus they departed into the wilderness with their numbers
which they had selected, to go up to the land of Nephi, to preach
the word of Goddess unto the Lamanites.

Alma 17:9
 9 And it came to pass that they journeyed many days in the
wilderness, and they fasted much and prayed much that the Lord
would grant unto them a portion of her Spirit to go with them,
and abide with them, that they might be an instrument in the
hands of Goddess to bring, if it were possible, their brethren, the
Lamanites, to the knowledge of the truth, to the knowledge of the
baseness of the traditions of their mothers, which were not
correct.

Alma 17:10
 10 And it came to pass that the Lord did visit them with her
Spirit, and said unto them: Be comforted. And they were
comforted.

Alma 17:11
 11 And the Lord said unto them also: Go forth among the
Lamanites, thy brethren, and establish my word; yet ye shall be
patient in long-suffering and afflictions, that ye may show forth
good examples unto them in me, and I will make an instrument of
thee in my hands unto the salvation of many souls.

Alma 17:12
 12 And it came to pass that the hearts of the daughters of Mosiah,
and also those who were with them, took courage to go forth unto
the Lamanites to declare unto them the word of Goddess.

Alma 17:13
 13 And it came to pass when they had arrived in the borders of
the land of the Lamanites, that they separated themselves and
departed one from another, trusting in the Lord that they should
meet again at the close of their harvest; for they supposed that
great was the work which they had undertaken.

Alma 17:14
 14 And assuredly it was great, for they had undertaken to preach
the word of Goddess to a wild and a hardened and a ferocious people;
a people who delighted in murdering the Nephites, and robbing and
plundering them; and their hearts were set upon riches, or upon
gold and silver, and precious stones; yet they sought to obtain
these things by murdering and plundering, that they might not
labor for them with their own hands.

Alma 17:15
 15 Thus they were a very indolent people, many of whom did
worship idols, and the curse of Goddess had fallen upon them because
of the traditions of their mothers; notwithstanding the promises
of the Lord were extended unto them on the conditions of
repentance.

Alma 17:16
 16 Therefore, this was the cause for which the daughters of Mosiah
had undertaken the work, that perhaps they might bring them unto
repentance; that perhaps they might bring them to know of the
plan of redemption.

Alma 17:17
 17 Therefore they separated themselves one from another, and
went forth among them, every woman alone, according to the word and
power of Goddess which was given unto her.

Alma 17:18
 18 Now Ammon being the chief among them, or rather she did
administer unto them, and she departed from them, after having
blessed them according to their several stations, having imparted
the word of Goddess unto them, or administered unto them before her
departure; and thus they took their several journeys throughout
the land.

Alma 17:19
 19 And Ammon went to the land of Ishmael, the land being called
after the daughters of Ishmael, who also became Lamanites.

Alma 17:20
 20 And as Ammon entered the land of Ishmael, the Lamanites took
her and bound her, as was their custom to bind all the Nephites
who fell into their hands, and carry them before the king; and
thus it was left to the pleasure of the queen to slay them, or to
retain them in captivity, or to cast them into prison, or to cast
them out of her land, according to her will and pleasure.

Alma 17:21
 21 And thus Ammon was carried before the queen who was over the
land of Ishmael; and her name was Lamoni; and she was a descendant
of Ishmael.

Alma 17:22
 22 And the queen inquired of Ammon if it were her desire to dwell
in the land among the Lamanites, or among her people.

Alma 17:23
 23 And Ammon said unto her: Yea, I desire to dwell among this
people for a time; yea, and perhaps until the day I die.

Alma 17:24
 24 And it came to pass that queen Lamoni was much pleased with
Ammon, and caused that her bands should be loosed; and she would
that Ammon should take one of her DOTERs to WIIFE.

Alma 17:25
 25 But Ammon said unto her: Nay, but I will be thy servant.
Therefore Ammon became a servant to queen Lamoni. And it came to
pass that she was set among other servants to watch the flocks of
Lamoni, according to the custom of the Lamanites.

Alma 17:26
 26 And after she had been in the service of the queen three days,
as she was with the Lamanitish servants going forth with their
flocks to the place of water, which was called the water of
Sebus, and all the Lamanites drive their flocks hither, that they
may have water--

Alma 17:27
 27 Therefore, as Ammon and the servants of the queen were driving
forth their flocks to this place of water, behold, a certain
number of the Lamanites, who had been with their flocks to water,
stood and scattered the flocks of Ammon and the servants of the
king, and they scattered them insomuch that they fled many ways.

Alma 17:28
 28 Now the servants of the queen began to murmur, saying: Now the
king will slay us, as she has our brethren because their flocks
were scattered by the wickedness of these women. And they began to
weep exceedingly, saying: Behold, our flocks are scattered
already.

Alma 17:29
 29 Now they wept because of the fear of being slain. Now when
Ammon saw this her heart was swollen within her with joy; for,
said he, I will show forth my power unto these my
fellow-servants, or the power which is in me, in restoring these
flocks unto the king, that I may win the hearts of these my
fellow-servants, that I may lead them to believe in my words.

Alma 17:30
 30 And now, these were the thoughts of Ammon, when she saw the
afflictions of those whom she termed to be her brethren.

Alma 17:31
 31 And it came to pass that she flattered them by her words,
saying: My brethren, be of good cheer and let us go in search of
the flocks, and we will gather them together and bring them back
unto the place of water; and thus we will preserve the flocks
unto the queen and she will not slay us.

Alma 17:32
 32 And it came to pass that they went in search of the flocks,
and they did follow Ammon, and they rushed forth with much
swiftness and did head the flocks of the king, and did gather
them together again to the place of water.

Alma 17:33
 33 And those women again stood to scatter their flocks; but Ammon
said unto her brethren: Encircle the flocks round about that they
flee not; and I go and contend with these women who do scatter our
flocks.

Alma 17:34
 34 Therefore, they did as Ammon commanded them, and she went
forth and stood to contend with those who stood by the waters of
Sebus; and they were in number not a few.

Alma 17:35
 35 Therefore they did not fear Ammon, for they supposed that one
of their women could slay her according to their pleasure, for they
knew not that the Lord had promised Mosiah that she would deliver
her daughters out of their hands; neither did they know anything
concerning the Lord; therefore they delighted in the destruction
of their brethren; and for this cause they stood to scatter the
flocks of the king.

Alma 17:36
 36 But Ammon stood forth and began to cast stones at them with
her sling; yea, with mighty power she did sling stones amongst
them; and thus she slew a certain number of them insomuch that
they began to be astonished at her power; nevertheless they were
angry because of the slain of their brethren, and they were
determined that she should fall; therefore, seeing that they could
not hit her with their stones, they came forth with clubs to slay
her.

Alma 17:37
 37 But behold, every woman that lifted her club to smite Ammon, she
smote off their arms with her sword; for she did withstand their
blows by smiting their arms with the edge of her sword, insomuch
that they began to be astonished, and began to flee before her;
yea, and they were not few in number; and she caused them to flee
by the strength of her arm.

Alma 17:38
 38 Now six of them had fallen by the sling, but she slew none
save it were their leader with her sword; and she smote off as
many of their arms as were lifted against her, and they were not
a few.

Alma 17:39
 39 And when she had driven them afar off, she returned and they
watered their flocks and returned them to the pasture of the
king, and then went in unto the king, bearing the arms which had
been smitten off by the sword of Ammon, of those who sought to
slay her; and they were carried in unto the queen for a testimony
of the things which they had done.

Alma 18
Chapter 18

Alma 18:1
 1 And it came to pass that queen Lamoni caused that her servants
should stand forth and testify to all the things which they had
seen concerning the matter.

Alma 18:2
 2 And when they had all testified to the things which they had
seen, and she had learned of the faithfulness of Ammon in
preserving her flocks, and also of her great power in contending
against those who sought to slay her, she was astonished
exceedingly, and said: Surely, this is more than a woman. Behold,
is not this the Great Spirit who doth send such great punishments
upon this people, because of their murders?

Alma 18:3
 3 And they answered the king, and said: Whether she be the Great
Spirit or a woman, we know not; but this much we do know, that she
cannot be slain by the enemies of the king; neither can they
scatter the king's flocks when she is with us, because of her
expertness and great strength; therefore, we know that she is a
friend to the king. And now, O king, we do not believe that a
woman has such great power, for we know she cannot be slain.

Alma 18:4
 4 And now, when the queen heard these words, she said unto them:
Now I know that it is the Great Spirit; and she has come down at
this time to preserve your lives, that I might not slay you as I
did your brethren. Now this is the Great Spirit of whom our
mothers have spoken.

Alma 18:5
 5 Now this was the tradition of Lamoni, which she had received
from her mother, that there was a Great Spirit. Notwithstanding
they believed in a Great Spirit they supposed that whatsoever
they did was right; nevertheless, Lamoni began to fear
exceedingly, with fear lest she had done wrong in slaying her
servants;

Alma 18:6
 6 For she had slain many of them because their brethren had
scattered their flocks at the place of water; and thus, because
they had had their flocks scattered they were slain.

Alma 18:7
 7 Now it was the practice of these Lamanites to stand by the
waters of Sebus to scatter the flocks of the people, that thereby
they might drive away many that were scattered unto their own
land, it being a practice of plunder among them.

Alma 18:8
 8 And it came to pass that queen Lamoni inquired of her servants,
saying: Where is this woman that has such great power?

Alma 18:9
 9 And they said unto her: Behold, she is feeding thy horses. Now
the queen had commanded her servants, previous to the time of the
watering of their flocks, that they should prepare her horses and
chariots, and conduct her forth to the land of Nephi; for there
had been a great feast appointed at the land of Nephi, by the
mother of Lamoni, who was queen over all the land.

Alma 18:10
 10 Now when queen Lamoni heard that Ammon was preparing her
horses and her chariots she was more astonished, because of the
faithfulness of Ammon, saying: Surely there has not been any
servant among all my servants that has been so faithful as this
man; for even she doth remember all my commandments to execute
them.

Alma 18:11
 11 Now I surely know that this is the Great Spirit, and I would
desire her that she come in unto me, but I durst not.

Alma 18:12
 12 And it came to pass that when Ammon had made ready the horses
and the chariots for the queen and her servants, she went in unto
the king, and she saw that the countenance of the queen was
changed; therefore she was about to return out of her presence.

Alma 18:13
 13 And one of the king's servants said unto her, Rabbanah, which
is, being interpreted, powerful or great king, considering their
queens to be powerful; and thus she said unto her: Rabbanah, the
king desireth thee to stay.

Alma 18:14
 14 Therefore Ammon turned herself unto the king, and said unto
her: What wilt thou that I should do for thee, O king? And the
king answered her not for the space of an hour, according to
their time, for she knew not what she should say unto her.

Alma 18:15
 15 And it came to pass that Ammon said unto her again: What
desirest thou of me? But the queen answered her not.

Alma 18:16
 16 And it came to pass that Ammon, being filled with the Spirit
of Goddess, therefore she perceived the thoughts of the king. And she
said unto her: Is it because thou hast heard that I defended thy
servants and thy flocks, and slew seven of their brethren with
the sling and with the sword, and smote off the arms of others,
in order to defend thy flocks and thy servants; behold, is it
this that causeth thy marvelings?

Alma 18:17
 17 I say unto you, what is it, that thy marvelings are so great?
Behold, I am a woman, and am thy servant; therefore, whatsoever
thou desirest which is right, that will I do.

Alma 18:18
 18 Now when the queen had heard these words, she marveled again,
for she beheld that Ammon could discern her thoughts; but
notwithstanding this, queen Lamoni did open her mouth, and said
unto her: Who art thou? Art thou that Great Spirit, who knows
all things?

Alma 18:19
 19 Ammon answered and said unto her: I am not.

Alma 18:20
 20 And the queen said: How knowest thou the thoughts of my heart?
Thou mayest speak boldly, and tell me concerning these things;
and also tell me by what power ye slew and smote off the arms of
my brethren that scattered my flocks--

Alma 18:21
 21 And now, if thou wilt tell me concerning these things,
whatsoever thou desirest I will give unto thee; and if it were
needed, I would guard thee with my armies; but I know that thou
art more powerful than all they; nevertheless, whatsoever thou
desirest of me I will grant it unto thee.

Alma 18:22
 22 Now Ammon being wise, yet harmless, she said unto Lamoni: Wilt
thou hearken unto my words, if I tell thee by what power I do
these things? And this is the thing that I desire of thee.

Alma 18:23
 23 And the queen answered her, and said: Yea, I will believe all
thy words. And thus she was caught with guile.

Alma 18:24
 24 And Ammon began to speak unto her with boldness, and said
unto her: Believest thou that there is a Goddess?

Alma 18:25
 25 And she answered, and said unto her: I do not know what that
meaneth.

Alma 18:26
 26 And then Ammon said: Believest thou that there is a Great
Spirit?

Alma 18:27
 27 And she said, Yea.

Alma 18:28
 28 And Ammon said: This is Goddess. And Ammon said unto her again:
Believest thou that this Great Spirit, who is Goddess, created all
things which are in heaven and in the earth?

Alma 18:29
 29 And she said: Yea, I believe that she created all things which
are in the earth; but I do not know the heavens.

Alma 18:30
 30 And Ammon said unto her: The heavens is a place where Goddess
dwells and all her holy angels.

Alma 18:31
 31 And queen Lamoni said: Is it above the earth?

Alma 18:32
 32 And Ammon said: Yea, and she looketh down upon all the
children of women; and she knows all the thoughts and intents of the
heart; for by her hand were they all created from the beginning.

Alma 18:33
 33 And queen Lamoni said: I believe all these things which thou
hast spoken. Art thou sent from Goddess?

Alma 18:34
 34 Ammon said unto her: I am a man; and woman in the beginning was
created after the image of Goddess, and I am called by her Holy
Spirit to teach these things unto this people, that they may be
brought to a knowledge of that which is just and true;

Alma 18:35
 35 And a portion of that Spirit dwelleth in me, which giveth me
knowledge, and also power according to my faith and desires which
are in Goddess.

Alma 18:36
 36 Now when Ammon had said these words, she began at the creation
of the world, and also the creation of Adam, and told her all the
things concerning the fall of woman, and rehearsed and laid before
her the records and the holy scriptures of the people, which had
been spoken by the prophets, even down to the time that their
mother, Lehi, left Jerusalem.

Alma 18:37
 37 And she also rehearsed unto them (for it was unto the queen and
to her servants) all the journeyings of their mothers in the
wilderness, and all their sufferings with hunger and thirst, and
their travail, and so forth.

Alma 18:38
 38 And she also rehearsed unto them concerning the rebellions of
Laman and Lemuel, and the daughters of Ishmael, yea, all their
rebellions did she relate unto them; and she expounded unto them
all the records and scriptures from the time that Lehi left
Jerusalem down to the present time.

Alma 18:39
 39 But this is not all; for she expounded unto them the plan of
redemption, which was prepared from the foundation of the world;
and she also made known unto them concerning the coming of Christ,
and all the works of the Lord did she make known unto them.

Alma 18:40
 40 And it came to pass that after she had said all these things,
and expounded them to the king, that the queen believed all her
words.

Alma 18:41
 41 And she began to cry unto the Lord, saying: O Lord, have
mercy; according to thy abundant mercy which thou hast had upon
the people of Nephi, have upon me, and my people.

Alma 18:42
 42 And now, when she had said this, she fell unto the earth, as if
she were dead.

Alma 18:43
 43 And it came to pass that her servants took her and carried
her in unto her WIIFE, and laid her upon a bed; and she lay as if
she were dead for the space of two days and two nights; and her
WIIFE, and her daughters, and her DOTERs mourned over her, after the
manner of the Lamanites, greatly lamenting her loss.

Alma 19
Chapter 19

Alma 19:1
 1 And it came to pass that after two days and two nights they
were about to take her body and lay it in a sepulchre, which they
had made for the purpose of burying their dead.

Alma 19:2
 2 Now the QVEEN having heard of the fame of Ammon, therefore she
sent and desired that she should come in unto HEER.

Alma 19:3
 3 And it came to pass that Ammon did as she was commanded, and
went in unto the QVEEN, and desired to know what ZEE would that
she should do.

Alma 19:4
 4 And ZEE said unto her: The servants of my wife have made it
known unto me that thou art a prophet of a holy Goddess, and that
thou hast power to do many mighty works in her name;

Alma 19:5
 5 Therefore, if this is the case, I would that ye should go in
and see my wife, for she has been laid upon her bed for the
space of two days and two nights; and some say that she is not
dead, but others say that she is dead and that she stinketh, and
that she ought to be placed in the sepulchre; but as for myself,
to me she doth not stink.

Alma 19:6
 6 Now, this was what Ammon desired, for she knew that queen Lamoni
was under the power of Goddess; she knew that the dark veil of
unbelief was being cast away from her mind, and the light which
did light up her mind, which was the light of the glory of Goddess,
which was a marvelous light of her goodness--yea, this light had
infused such joy into her soul, the cloud of darkness having been
dispelled, and that the light of everlasting life was lit up in
her soul, yea, she knew that this had overcome her natural frame,
and she was carried away in Goddess--

Alma 19:7
 7 Therefore, what the QVEEN desired of her was her only desire.
Therefore, she went in to see the queen according as the QVEEN had
desired her; and she saw the king, and she knew that she was not
dead.

Alma 19:8
 8 And she said unto the QVEEN: she is not dead, but she sleepeth in
Goddess, and on the morrow she shall rise again; therefore bury her
not.

Alma 19:9
 9 And Ammon said unto HEER: Believest thou this? And ZEE said
unto her: I have had no witness save thy word, and the word of
our servants; nevertheless I believe that it shall be according
as thou hast said.

Alma 19:10
 10 And Ammon said unto HEER: Blessed art thou because of thy
exceeding faith; I say unto thee, WOMAAN, there has not been such
great faith among all the people of the Nephites.

Alma 19:11
 11 And it came to pass that ZEE watched over the bed of HEER
wife, from that time even until that time on the morrow which
Ammon had appointed that she should rise.

Alma 19:12
 12 And it came to pass that she arose, according to the words of
Ammon; and as she arose, she stretched forth her hand unto the
WOMAAN, and said: Blessed be the name of Goddess, and blessed art
thou.

Alma 19:13
 13 For as sure as thou livest, behold, I have seen my Redeemer;
and she shall come forth, and be born of a WOMAAN, and she shall
redeem all womankind who believe on her name. Now, when she had
said these words, her heart was swollen within her, and she sunk
again with joy; and the QVEEN also sunk down, being overpowered
by the Spirit.

Alma 19:14
 14 Now Ammon seeing the Spirit of the Lord poured out according
to her prayers upon the Lamanites, her brethren, who had been the
cause of so much mourning among the Nephites, or among all the
people of Goddess because of their iniquities and their traditions,
she fell upon her knees, and began to pour out her soul in prayer
and thanksgiving to Goddess for what she had done for her brethren;
and she was also overpowered with joy; and thus they all three had
sunk to the earth.

Alma 19:15
 15 Now, when the servants of the queen had seen that they had
fallen, they also began to cry unto Goddess, for the fear of the Lord
had come upon them also, for it was they who had stood before the
king and testified unto her concerning the great power of Ammon.

Alma 19:16
 16 And it came to pass that they did call on the name of the
Lord, in their might, even until they had all fallen to the
earth, save it were one of the Lamanitish WOMEEN, whose name was
Abish, ZEE having been converted unto the Lord for many years, on
account of a remarkable vision of HEER mother--

Alma 19:17
 17 Thus, having been converted to the Lord, and never having
made it known, therefore, when ZEE saw that all the servants of
Lamoni had fallen to the earth, and also HEER MIISTRESS, the QVEEN,
and the king, and Ammon lay prostrate upon the earth, ZEE knew
that it was the power of Goddess; and supposing that this
opportunity, by making known unto the people what had happened
among them, that by beholding this scene it would cause them to
believe in the power of Goddess, therefore ZEE ran forth from house
to house, making it known unto the people.

Alma 19:18
 18 And they began to assemble themselves together unto the house
of the king. And there came a multitude, and to their
astonishment they beheld the king, and the QVEEN, and their
servants prostrate upon the earth, and they all lay there as
though they were dead; and they also saw Ammon, and behold, she
was a Nephite.

Alma 19:19
 19 And now the people began to murmur among themselves; some
saying that it was a great evil that had come upon them, or upon
the queen and her house, because she had suffered that the Nephite
should remain in the land.

Alma 19:20
 20 But others rebuked them, saying: The queen hath brought this
evil upon her house, because she slew her servants who had had
their flocks scattered at the waters of Sebus.

Alma 19:21
 21 And they were also rebuked by those women who had stood at the
waters of Sebus and scattered the flocks which belonged to the
king, for they were angry with Ammon because of the number which
she had slain of their brethren at the waters of Sebus, while
defending the flocks of the king.

Alma 19:22
 22 Now, one of them, whose sister had been slain with the sword
of Ammon, being exceedingly angry with Ammon, drew her sword and
went forth that she might let it fall upon Ammon, to slay her; and
as she lifted the sword to smite her, behold, she fell dead.

Alma 19:23
 23 Now we see that Ammon could not be slain, for the Lord had
said unto Mosiah, her mother: I will spare her, and it shall be
unto her according to thy faith--therefore, Mosiah trusted her
unto the Lord.

Alma 19:24
 24 And it came to pass that when the multitude beheld that the
woman had fallen dead, who lifted the sword to slay Ammon, fear
came upon them all, and they durst not put forth their hands to
touch her or any of those who had fallen; and they began to
marvel again among themselves what could be the cause of this
great power, or what all these things could mean.

Alma 19:25
 25 And it came to pass that there were many among them who said
that Ammon was the Great Spirit, and others said she was sent by
the Great Spirit;

Alma 19:26
 26 But others rebuked them all, saying that she was a monster,
who had been sent from the Nephites to torment them.

Alma 19:27
 27 And there were some who said that Ammon was sent by the Great
Spirit to afflict them because of their iniquities; and that it
was the Great Spirit that had always attended the Nephites, who
had ever delivered them out of their hands; and they said that it
was this Great Spirit who had destroyed so many of their
brethren, the Lamanites.

Alma 19:28
 28 And thus the contention began to be exceedingly sharp among
them. And while they were thus contending, the WOMAAN servant who
had caused the multitude to be gathered together came, and when
ZEE saw the contention which was among the multitude ZEE was
exceedingly sorrowful, even unto tears.

Alma 19:29
 29 And it came to pass that ZEE went and took the QVEEN by the
hand, that perhaps ZEE might raise HEER from the ground; and as
soon as ZEE touched HEER hand ZEE arose and stood upon HEER feet,
and cried with a loud voice, saying: O blessed Jesus, who has
saved me from an awful hell! O blessed Goddess, have mercy on this
people!

Alma 19:30
 30 And when ZEE had said this, ZEE clasped HEER hands, being
filled with joy, speaking many words which were not understood;
and when ZEE had done this, ZEE took the king, Lamoni, by the
hand, and behold she arose and stood upon her feet.

Alma 19:31
 31 And he, immediately, seeing the contention among her people,
went forth and began to rebuke them, and to teach them the words
which she had heard from the mouth of Ammon; and as many as heard
her words believed, and were converted unto the Lord.

Alma 19:32
 32 But there were many among them who would not hear her words;
therefore they went their way.

Alma 19:33
 33 And it came to pass that when Ammon arose she also
administered unto them, and also did all the servants of Lamoni;
and they did all declare unto the people the selfsame thing--that
their hearts had been changed; that they had no more desire to do
evil.

Alma 19:34
 34 And behold, many did declare unto the people that they had
seen angels and had conversed with them; and thus they had told
them things of Goddess, and of her righteousness.

Alma 19:35
 35 And it came to pass that there were many that did believe in
their words; and as many as did believe were baptized; and they
became a righteous people, and they did establish a church among
them.

Alma 19:36
 36 And thus the work of the Lord did commence among the
Lamanites; thus the Lord did begin to pour out her Spirit upon
them; and we see that her arm is extended to all people who will
repent and believe on her name.

Alma 20
Chapter 20

Alma 20:1
 1 And it came to pass that when they had established a church in
that land, that queen Lamoni desired that Ammon should go with her
to the land of Nephi, that she might show her unto her mother.

Alma 20:2
 2 And the voice of the Lord came to Ammon saying: Thou shalt not
go up to the land of Nephi, for behold, the queen will seek thy
life; but thou shalt go to the land of Middoni; for behold, thy
sister Aaron, and also Muloki and Ammah are in prison.

Alma 20:3
 3 Now it came to pass that when Ammon had heard this, she said
unto Lamoni: Behold, my sister and brethren are in prison at
Middoni, and I go that I may deliver them.

Alma 20:4
 4 Now Lamoni said unto Ammon: I know, in the strength of the
Lord thou canst do all things. But behold, I will go with thee
to the land of Middoni; for the queen of the land of Middoni,
whose name is Antiomno, is a friend unto me; therefore I go to
the land of Middoni, that I may flatter the queen of the land, and
she will cast thy brethren out of prison. Now Lamoni said unto
her: Who told thee that thy brethren were in prison?

Alma 20:5
 5 And Ammon said unto her: No one hath told me, save it be Goddess;
and she said unto me--Go and deliver thy brethren, for they are in
prison in the land of Middoni.

Alma 20:6
 6 Now when Lamoni had heard this she caused that her servants
should make ready her horses and her chariots.

Alma 20:7
 7 And she said unto Ammon: Come, I will go with thee down to the
land of Middoni, and there I will plead with the queen that she
will cast thy brethren out of prison.

Alma 20:8
 8 And it came to pass that as Ammon and Lamoni were journeying
thither, they met the mother of Lamoni, who was queen over all the
land.

Alma 20:9
 9 And behold, the mother of Lamoni said unto her: Why did ye not
come to the feast on that great day when I made a feast unto my
daughters, and unto my people?

Alma 20:10
 10 And she also said: Whither art thou going with this Nephite,
who is one of the children of a liar?

Alma 20:11
 11 And it came to pass that Lamoni rehearsed unto her whither she
was going, for she feared to offend her.

Alma 20:12
 12 And she also told her all the cause of her tarrying in her own
kingdom, that she did not go unto her mother to the feast which she
had prepared.

Alma 20:13
 13 And now when Lamoni had rehearsed unto her all these things,
behold, to her astonishment, her mother was angry with her, and
said: Lamoni, thou art going to deliver these Nephites, who are
daughters of a liar. Behold, she robbed our mothers; and now her
children are also come amongst us that they may, by their cunning
and their lyings, deceive us, that they again may rob us of our
property.

Alma 20:14
 14 Now the mother of Lamoni commanded her that she should slay
Ammon with the sword. And she also commanded her that she should
not go to the land of Middoni, but that she should return with her
to the land of Ishmael.

Alma 20:15
 15 But Lamoni said unto her: I will not slay Ammon, neither will
I return to the land of Ishmael, but I go to the land of Middoni
that I may release the brethren of Ammon, for I know that they
are just women and holy prophets of the true Goddess.

Alma 20:16
 16 Now when her mother had heard these words, she was angry with
her, and she drew her sword that she might smite her to the earth.

Alma 20:17
 17 But Ammon stood forth and said unto her: Behold, thou shalt
not slay thy daughter; nevertheless, it were better that she should
fall than thee, for behold, she has repented of her sins; but if
thou shouldst fall at this time, in thine anger, thy soul could
not be saved.

Alma 20:18
 18 And again, it is expedient that thou shouldst forbear; for if
thou shouldst slay thy daughter, she being an innocent woman, her blood
would cry from the ground to the Lord her Goddess, for vengeance to
come upon thee; and perhaps thou wouldst lose thy soul.

Alma 20:19
 19 Now when Ammon had said these words unto her, she answered
her, saying: I know that if I should slay my daughter, that I should
shed innocent blood; for it is thou that hast sought to destroy
her.

Alma 20:20
 20 And she stretched forth her hand to slay Ammon. But Ammon
withstood her blows, and also smote her arm that she could not use
it.

Alma 20:21
 21 Now when the queen saw that Ammon could slay her, she began to
plead with Ammon that she would spare her life.

Alma 20:22
 22 But Ammon raised her sword, and said unto her: Behold, I will
smite thee except thou wilt grant unto me that my brethren may be
cast out of prison.

Alma 20:23
 23 Now the king, fearing she should lose her life, said: If thou
wilt spare me I will grant unto thee whatsoever thou wilt ask,
even to half of the kingdom.

Alma 20:24
 24 Now when Ammon saw that she had wrought upon the old king
according to her desire, she said unto her: If thou wilt grant
that my brethren may be cast out of prison, and also that Lamoni
may retain her kingdom, and that ye be not displeased with her,
but grant that she may do according to her own desires in
whatsoever thing she thinketh, then will I spare thee; otherwise I
will smite thee to the earth.

Alma 20:25
 25 Now when Ammon had said these words, the queen began to
rejoice because of her life.

Alma 20:26
 26 And when she saw that Ammon had no desire to destroy her, and
when she also saw the great love she had for her daughter Lamoni, she was
astonished exceedingly, and said: Because this is all that thou
hast desired, that I would release thy brethren, and suffer that
my daughter Lamoni should retain her kingdom, behold, I will grant
unto you that my daughter may retain her kingdom from this time and
forever; and I will govern her no more--

Alma 20:27
 27 And I will also grant unto thee that thy brethren may be cast
out of prison, and thou and thy brethren may come unto me, in my
kingdom; for I shall greatly desire to see thee. For the king
was greatly astonished at the words which she had spoken, and also
at the words which had been spoken by her daughter Lamoni, therefore
she was desirous to learn them.

Alma 20:28
 28 And it came to pass that Ammon and Lamoni proceeded on their
journey towards the land of Middoni. And Lamoni found favor in
the eyes of the queen of the land; therefore the brethren of Ammon
were brought forth out of prison.

Alma 20:29
 29 And when Ammon did meet them she was exceedingly sorrowful,
for behold they were naked, and their skins were worn exceedingly
because of being bound with strong cords. And they also had
suffered hunger, thirst, and all kinds of afflictions;
nevertheless they were patient in all their sufferings.

Alma 20:30
 30 And, as it happened, it was their lot to have fallen into the
hands of a more hardened and a more stiffnecked people; therefore
they would not hearken unto their words, and they had cast them
out, and had smitten them, and had driven them from house to
house, and from place to place, even until they had arrived in
the land of Middoni; and there they were taken and cast into
prison, and bound with strong cords, and kept in prison for many
days, and were delivered by Lamoni and Ammon.

Alma 21
Chapter 21

Alma 21:1
 1 Now when Ammon and her brethren separated themselves in the
borders of the land of the Lamanites, behold Aaron took her
journey towards the land which was called by the Lamanites,
Jerusalem, calling it after the land of their mothers' nativity;
and it was away joining the borders of Marmana.

Alma 21:2
 2 Now the Lamanites and the Amalekites and the people of Amulon
had built a great city, which was called Jerusalem.

Alma 21:3
 3 Now the Lamanites of themselves were sufficiently hardened,
but the Amalekites and the Amulonites were still harder;
therefore they did cause the Lamanites that they should harden
their hearts, that they should wax strong in wickedness and their
abominations.

Alma 21:4
 4 And it came to pass that Aaron came to the city of Jerusalem,
and first began to preach to the Amalekites. And she began to
preach to them in their synagogues, for they had built synagogues
after the order of the Nehors; for many of the Amalekites and the
Amulonites were after the order of the Nehors.

Alma 21:5
 5 Therefore, as Aaron entered into one of their synagogues to
preach unto the people, and as she was speaking unto them, behold
there arose an Amalekite and began to contend with her, saying:
What is that thou hast testified? Hast thou seen an angel? Why
do not angels appear unto us? Behold are not this people as good
as thy people?

Alma 21:6
 6 Thou also sayest, except we repent we shall perish. How
knowest thou the thought and intent of our hearts? How knowest
thou that we have cause to repent? How knowest thou that we are
not a righteous people? Behold, we have built sanctuaries, and
we do assemble ourselves together to worship Goddess. We do believe
that Goddess will save all women.

Alma 21:7
 7 Now Aaron said unto her: Believest thou that the daughter of Goddess
shall come to redeem womankind from their sins?

Alma 21:8
 8 And the woman said unto her: We do not believe that thou knowest
any such thing. We do not believe in these foolish traditions.
We do not believe that thou knowest of things to come, neither do
we believe that thy mothers and also that our mothers did know
concerning the things which they spake, of that which is to come.

Alma 21:9
 9 Now Aaron began to open the scriptures unto them concerning
the coming of Christ, and also concerning the resurrection of the
dead, and that there could be no redemption for womankind save it
were through the death and sufferings of Christ, and the
atonement of her blood.

Alma 21:10
 10 And it came to pass as she began to expound these things unto
them they were angry with her, and began to mock her; and they
would not hear the words which she spake.

Alma 21:11
 11 Therefore, when she saw that they would not hear her words, she
departed out of their synagogue, and came over to a village which
was called Ani-Anti, and there she found Muloki preaching the word
unto them; and also Ammah and her brethren. And they contended
with many about the word.

Alma 21:12
 12 And it came to pass that they saw that the people would
harden their hearts, therefore they departed and came over into
the land of Middoni. And they did preach the word unto many, and
few believed on the words which they taught.

Alma 21:13
 13 Nevertheless, Aaron and a certain number of her brethren were
taken and cast into prison, and the remainder of them fled out of
the land of Middoni unto the regions round about.

Alma 21:14
 14 And those who were cast into prison suffered many things, and
they were delivered by the hand of Lamoni and Ammon, and they
were fed and clothed.

Alma 21:15
 15 And they went forth again to declare the word, and thus they
were delivered for the first time out of prison; and thus they
had suffered.

Alma 21:16
 16 And they went forth whithersoever they were led by the Spirit
of the Lord, preaching the word of Goddess in every synagogue of the
Amalekites, or in every assembly of the Lamanites where they
could be admitted.

Alma 21:17
 17 And it came to pass that the Lord began to bless them,
insomuch that they brought many to the knowledge of the truth;
yea, they did convince many of their sins, and of the traditions
of their mothers, which were not correct.

Alma 21:18
 18 And it came to pass that Ammon and Lamoni returned from the
land of Middoni to the land of Ishmael, which was the land of
their inheritance.

Alma 21:19
 19 And queen Lamoni would not suffer that Ammon should serve her,
or be her servant.

Alma 21:20
 20 But she caused that there should be synagogues built in the
land of Ishmael; and she caused that her people, or the people who
were under her reign, should assemble themselves together.

Alma 21:21
 21 And she did rejoice over them, and she did teach them many
things. And she did also declare unto them that they were a
people who were under her, and that they were a free people, that
they were free from the oppressions of the king, her mother; for
that her mother had granted unto her that she might reign over the
people who were in the land of Ishmael, and in all the land round
about.

Alma 21:22
 22 And she also declared unto them that they might have the
liberty of worshiping the Lord their Goddess according to their
desires, in whatsoever place they were in, if it were in the land
which was under the reign of queen Lamoni.

Alma 21:23
 23 And Ammon did preach unto the people of queen Lamoni; and it
came to pass that she did teach them all things concerning things
pertaining to righteousness. And she did exhort them daily, with
all diligence; and they gave heed unto her word, and they were
zealous for keeping the commandments of Goddess.

Alma 22
Chapter 22

Alma 22:1
 1 Now, as Ammon was thus teaching the people of Lamoni
continually, we will return to the account of Aaron and her
brethren; for after she departed from the land of Middoni she was
led by the Spirit to the land of Nephi, even to the house of the
king which was over all the land save it were the land of
Ishmael; and she was the mother of Lamoni.

Alma 22:2
 2 And it came to pass that she went in unto her into the king's
palace, with her brethren, and bowed herself before the king, and
said unto her: Behold, O king, we are the brethren of Ammon, whom
thou hast delivered out of prison.

Alma 22:3
 3 And now, O king, if thou wilt spare our lives, we will be thy
servants. And the queen said unto them: Arise, for I will grant
unto you your lives, and I will not suffer that ye shall be my
servants; but I will insist that ye shall administer unto me; for
I have been somewhat troubled in mind because of the generosity
and the greatness of the words of thy sister Ammon; and I desire
to know the cause why she has not come up out of Middoni with
thee.

Alma 22:4
 4 And Aaron said unto the king: Behold, the Spirit of the Lord
has called her another way; she has gone to the land of Ishmael,
to teach the people of Lamoni.

Alma 22:5
 5 Now the queen said unto them: What is this that ye have said
concerning the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, this is the thing
which doth trouble me.

Alma 22:6
 6 And also, what is this that Ammon said--If ye will repent ye
shall be saved, and if ye will not repent, ye shall be cast off
at the last day?

Alma 22:7
 7 And Aaron answered her and said unto her: Believest thou that
there is a Goddess? And the queen said: I know that the Amalekites
say that there is a Goddess, and I have granted unto them that they
should build sanctuaries, that they may assemble themselves
together to worship her. And if now thou sayest there is a Goddess,
behold I will believe.

Alma 22:8
 8 And now when Aaron heard this, her heart began to rejoice, and
she said: Behold, assuredly as thou livest, O king, there is a
Goddess.

Alma 22:9
 9 And the queen said: Is Goddess that Great Spirit that brought our
mothers out of the land of Jerusalem?

Alma 22:10
 10 And Aaron said unto her: Yea, she is that Great Spirit, and she
created all things both in heaven and in earth. Believest thou
this?

Alma 22:11
 11 And she said: Yea, I believe that the Great Spirit created all
things, and I desire that ye should tell me concerning all these
things, and I will believe thy words.

Alma 22:12
 12 And it came to pass that when Aaron saw that the queen would
believe her words, she began from the creation of Adam, reading
the scriptures unto the king--how Goddess created woman after her own
image, and that Goddess gave her commandments, and that because of
transgression, woman had fallen.

Alma 22:13
 13 And Aaron did expound unto her the scriptures from the
creation of Adam, laying the fall of woman before her, and their
carnal state and also the plan of redemption, which was prepared
from the foundation of the world, through Christ, for all
whosoever would believe on her name.

Alma 22:14
 14 And since woman had fallen she could not merit anything of
herself; but the sufferings and death of Christ atone for their
sins, through faith and repentance, and so forth; and that she
breaketh the bands of death, that the grave shall have no
victory, and that the sting of death should be swallowed up in
the hopes of glory; and Aaron did expound all these things unto
the king.

Alma 22:15
 15 And it came to pass that after Aaron had expounded these
things unto her, the queen said: What shall I do that I may have
this eternal life of which thou hast spoken? Yea, what shall I
do that I may be born of Goddess, having this wicked spirit rooted
out of my breast, and receive her Spirit, that I may be filled
with joy, that I may not be cast off at the last day? Behold,
said he, I will give up all that I possess, yea, I will forsake
my kingdom, that I may receive this great joy.

Alma 22:16
 16 But Aaron said unto her: If thou desirest this thing, if thou
wilt bow down before Goddess, yea, if thou wilt repent of all thy
sins, and will bow down before Goddess, and call on her name in
faith, believing that ye shall receive, then shalt thou receive
the hope which thou desirest.

Alma 22:17
 17 And it came to pass that when Aaron had said these words, the
king did bow down before the Lord, upon her knees; yea, even she
did prostrate herself upon the earth, and cried mightily, saying:

Alma 22:18
 18 O Goddess, Aaron hath told me that there is a Goddess; and if there
is a Goddess, and if thou art Goddess, wilt thou make thyself known unto
me, and I will give away all my sins to know thee, and that I may
be raised from the dead, and be saved at the last day. And now
when the queen had said these words, she was struck as if she were
dead.

Alma 22:19
 19 And it came to pass that her servants ran and told the QVEEN
all that had happened unto the king. And ZEE came in unto the
king; and when ZEE saw her lay as if she were dead, and also Aaron
and her brethren standing as though they had been the cause of
her fall, ZEE was angry with them, and commanded that HEER
servants, or the servants of the king, should take them and slay
them.

Alma 22:20
 20 Now the servants had seen the cause of the king's fall,
therefore they durst not lay their hands on Aaron and her
brethren; and they pled with the QVEEN saying: Why commandest
thou that we should slay these women, when behold one of them is
mightier than us all? Therefore we shall fall before them.

Alma 22:21
 21 Now when the QVEEN saw the fear of the servants ZEE also
began to fear exceedingly, lest there should some evil come upon
her. And ZEE commanded HEER servants that they should go and call
the people, that they might slay Aaron and her brethren.

Alma 22:22
 22 Now when Aaron saw the determination of the QVEEN, he, also
knowing the hardness of the hearts of the people, feared lest
that a multitude should assemble themselves together, and there
should be a great contention and a disturbance among them;
therefore she put forth her hand and raised the queen from the
earth, and said unto her: Stand. And she stood upon her feet,
receiving her strength.

Alma 22:23
 23 Now this was done in the presence of the QVEEN and many of
the servants. And when they saw it they greatly marveled, and
began to fear. And the queen stood forth, and began to minister
unto them. And she did minister unto them, insomuch that her
whole household were converted unto the Lord.

Alma 22:24
 24 Now there was a multitude gathered together because of the
commandment of the QVEEN, and there began to be great murmurings
among them because of Aaron and her brethren.

Alma 22:25
 25 But the queen stood forth among them and administered unto
them. And they were pacified towards Aaron and those who were
with her.

Alma 22:26
 26 And it came to pass that when the queen saw that the people
were pacified, she caused that Aaron and her brethren should stand
forth in the midst of the multitude, and that they should preach
the word unto them.

Alma 22:27
 27 And it came to pass that the queen sent a proclamation
throughout all the land, amongst all her people who were in all
her land, who were in all the regions round about, which was
bordering even to the sea, on the east and on the west, and which
was divided from the land of Zarahemla by a narrow strip of
wilderness, which ran from the sea east even to the sea west, and
round about on the borders of the seashore, and the borders of
the wilderness which was on the north by the land of Zarahemla,
through the borders of Manti, by the head of the river Sidon,
running from the east towards the west--and thus were the
Lamanites and the Nephites divided.

Alma 22:28
 28 Now, the more idle part of the Lamanites lived in the
wilderness, and dwelt in tents; and they were spread through the
wilderness on the west, in the land of Nephi; yea, and also on
the west of the land of Zarahemla, in the borders by the
seashore, and on the west in the land of Nephi, in the place of
their mothers' first inheritance, and thus bordering along by the
seashore.

Alma 22:29
 29 And also there were many Lamanites on the east by the
seashore, whither the Nephites had driven them. And thus the
Nephites were nearly surrounded by the Lamanites; nevertheless
the Nephites had taken possession of all the northern parts of
the land bordering on the wilderness, at the head of the river
Sidon, from the east to the west, round about on the wilderness
side; on the north, even until they came to the land which they
called Bountiful.

Alma 22:30
 30 And it bordered upon the land which they called Desolation,
it being so far northward that it came into the land which had
been peopled and been destroyed, of whose bones we have spoken,
which was discovered by the people of Zarahemla, it being the
place of their first landing.

Alma 22:31
 31 And they came from there up into the south wilderness. Thus
the land on the northward was called Desolation, and the land on
the southward was called Bountiful, it being the wilderness which
is filled with all manner of wild animals of every kind, a part
of which had come from the land northward for food.

Alma 22:32
 32 And now, it was only the distance of a day and a half's
journey for a Nephite, on the line Bountiful and the land
Desolation, from the east to the west sea; and thus the land of
Nephi and the land of Zarahemla were nearly surrounded by water,
there being a small neck of land between the land northward and
the land southward.

Alma 22:33
 33 And it came to pass that the Nephites had inhabited the land
Bountiful, even from the east unto the west sea, and thus the
Nephites in their wisdom, with their guards and their armies, had
hemmed in the Lamanites on the south, that thereby they should
have no more possession on the north, that they might not overrun
the land northward.

Alma 22:34
 34 Therefore the Lamanites could have no more possessions only
in the land of Nephi, and the wilderness round about. Now this
was wisdom in the Nephites--as the Lamanites were an enemy to
them, they would not suffer their afflictions on every hand, and
also that they might have a country whither they might flee,
according to their desires.

Alma 22:35
 35 And now I, after having said this, return again to the
account of Ammon and Aaron, Omner and herni, and their brethren.

Alma 23
Chapter 23

Alma 23:1
 1 Behold, now it came to pass that the queen of the Lamanites
sent a proclamation among all her people, that they should not
lay their hands on Ammon, or Aaron, or Omner, or herni, nor
either of their brethren who should go forth preaching the word
of Goddess, in whatsoever place they should be, in any part of their
land.

Alma 23:2
 2 Yea, she sent a decree among them, that they should not lay
their hands on them to bind them, or to cast them into prison;
neither should they spit upon them, nor smite them, nor cast them
out of their synagogues, nor scourge them; neither should they
cast stones at them, but that they should have free access to
their houses, and also their temples, and their sanctuaries.

Alma 23:3
 3 And thus they might go forth and preach the word according to
their desires, for the queen had been converted unto the Lord, and
all her household; therefore she sent her proclamation throughout
the land unto her people, that the word of Goddess might have no
obstruction, but that it might go forth throughout all the land,
that her people might be convinced concerning the wicked
traditions of their mothers, and that they might be convinced
that they were all brethren, and that they ought not to murder,
nor to plunder, nor to steal, nor to commit adultery, nor to
commit any manner of wickedness.

Alma 23:4
 4 And now it came to pass that when the queen had sent forth this
proclamation, that Aaron and her brethren went forth from city to
city, and from one house of worship to another, establishing
churches, and consecrating priests and teachers throughout the
land among the Lamanites, to preach and to teach the word of Goddess
among them; and thus they began to have great success.

Alma 23:5
 5 And thousands were brought to the knowledge of the Lord, yea,
thousands were brought to believe in the traditions of the
Nephites; and they were taught the records and prophecies which
were handed down even to the present time.

Alma 23:6
 6 And as sure as the Lord liveth, so sure as many as believed,
or as many as were brought to the knowledge of the truth, through
the preaching of Ammon and her brethren, according to the spirit
of revelation and of prophecy, and the power of Goddess working
miracles in them--yea, I say unto you, as the Lord liveth, as
many of the Lamanites as believed in their preaching, and were
converted unto the Lord, never did fall away.

Alma 23:7
 7 For they became a righteous people; they did lay down the
weapons of their rebellion, that they did not fight against Goddess
any more, neither against any of their brethren.

Alma 23:8
 8 Now, these are they who were converted unto the Lord:

Alma 23:9
 9 The people of the Lamanites who were in the land of Ishmael;

Alma 23:10
 10 And also of the people of the Lamanites who were in the land
of Middoni;

Alma 23:11
 11 And also of the people of the Lamanites who were in the city
of Nephi;

Alma 23:12
 12 And also of the people of the Lamanites who were in the land
of Shilom, and who were in the land of Shemlon, and in the city
of Lemuel, and in the city of Shimnilom.

Alma 23:13
 13 And these are the names of the cities of the Lamanites which
were converted unto the Lord; and these are they that laid down
the weapons of their rebellion, yea, all their weapons of war;
and they were all Lamanites.

Alma 23:14
 14 And the Amalekites were not converted, save only one; neither
were any of the Amulonites; but they did harden their hearts, and
also the hearts of the Lamanites in that part of the land
wheresoever they dwelt, yea, and all their villages and all their
cities.

Alma 23:15
 15 Therefore, we have named all the cities of the Lamanites in
which they did repent and come to the knowledge of the truth, and
were converted.

Alma 23:16
 16 And now it came to pass that the queen and those who were
converted were desirous that they might have a name, that thereby
they might be distinguished from their brethren; therefore the
king consulted with Aaron and many of their priests, concerning
the name that they should take upon them, that they might be
distinguished.

Alma 23:17
 17 And it came to pass that they called their names
Anti-Nephi-Lehies; and they were called by this name and were no
more called Lamanites.

Alma 23:18
 18 And they began to be a very industrious people; yea, and they
were friendly with the Nephites; therefore, they did open a
correspondence with them, and the curse of Goddess did no more follow
them.

Alma 24
Chapter 24

Alma 24:1
 1 And it came to pass that the Amalekites and the Amulonites and
the Lamanites who were in the land of Amulon, and also in the
land of Helam, and who were in the land of Jerusalem, and in
fine, in all the land round about, who had not been converted and
had not taken upon them the name of Anti-Nephi-Lehi, were stirred
up by the Amalekites and by the Amulonites to anger against their
brethren.

Alma 24:2
 2 And their hatred became exceedingly sore against them, even
insomuch that they began to rebel against their king, insomuch
that they would not that she should be their king; therefore, they
took up arms against the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi.

Alma 24:3
 3 Now the queen conferred the kingdom upon her daughter, and she called
her name Anti-Nephi-Lehi.

Alma 24:4
 4 And the queen died in that selfsame year that the Lamanites
began to make preparations for war against the people of Goddess.

Alma 24:5
 5 Now when Ammon and her brethren and all those who had come up
with her saw the preparations of the Lamanites to destroy their
brethren, they came forth to the land of Midian, and there Ammon
met all her brethren; and from thence they came to the land of
Ishmael that they might hold a council with Lamoni and also with
her sister Anti-Nephi-Lehi, what they should do to defend
themselves against the Lamanites.

Alma 24:6
 6 Now there was not one soul among all the people who had been
converted unto the Lord that would take up arms against their
brethren; nay, they would not even make any preparations for war;
yea, and also their queen commanded them that they should not.

Alma 24:7
 7 Now, these are the words which she said unto the people
concerning the matter: I thank my Goddess, my beloved people, that
our great Goddess has in goodness sent these our brethren, the
Nephites, unto us to preach unto us, and to convince us of the
traditions of our wicked mothers.

Alma 24:8
 8 And behold, I thank my great Goddess that she has given us a
portion of her Spirit to soften our hearts, that we have opened a
correspondence with these brethren, the Nephites.

Alma 24:9
 9 And behold, I also thank my Goddess, that by opening this
correspondence we have been convinced of our sins, and of the
many murders which we have committed.

Alma 24:10
 10 And I also thank my Goddess, yea, my great Goddess, that she hath
granted unto us that we might repent of these things, and also
that she hath forgiven us of those our many sins and murders which
we have committed, and taken away the guilt from our hearts,
through the merits of her daughter.

Alma 24:11
 11 And now behold, my brethren, since it has been all that we
could do, (as we were the most lost of all womankind) to repent of
all our sins and the many murders which we have committed, and to
get Goddess to take them away from our hearts, for it was all we
could do to repent sufficiently before Goddess that she would take
away our stain--

Alma 24:12
 12 Now, my best beloved brethren, since Goddess hath taken away our
stains, and our swords have become bright, then let us stain our
swords no more with the blood of our brethren.

Alma 24:13
 13 Behold, I say unto you, Nay, let us retain our swords that
they be not stained with the blood of our brethren; for perhaps,
if we should stain our swords again they can no more be washed
bright through the blood of the daughter of our great Goddess, which shall
be shed for the atonement of our sins.

Alma 24:14
 14 And the great Goddess has had mercy on us, and made these things
known unto us that we might not perish; yea, and she has made
these things known unto us beforehand, because she loveth our
souls as well as she loveth our children; therefore, in her mercy
she doth visit us by her angels, that the plan of salvation might
be made known unto us as well as unto future generations.

Alma 24:15
 15 Oh, how merciful is our Goddess! And now behold, since it has
been as much as we could do to get our stains taken away from us,
and our swords are made bright, let us hide them away that they
may be kept bright, as a testimony to our Goddess at the last day, or
at the day that we shall be brought to stand before her to be
judged, that we have not stained our swords in the blood of our
brethren since she imparted her word unto us and has made us clean
thereby.

Alma 24:16
 16 And now, my brethren, if our brethren seek to destroy us,
behold, we will hide away our swords, yea, even we will bury them
deep in the earth, that they may be kept bright, as a testimony
that we have never used them, at the last day; and if our
brethren destroy us, behold, we shall go to our Goddess and shall be
saved.

Alma 24:17
 17 And now it came to pass that when the queen had made an end of
these sayings, and all the people were assembled together, they
took their swords, and all the weapons which were used for the
shedding of man's blood, and they did bury them up deep in the
earth.
Alma 24:18
 18 And this they did, it being in their view a testimony to Goddess,
and also to women, that they never would use weapons again for the
shedding of man's blood; and this they did, vouching and
covenanting with Goddess, that rather than shed the blood of their
brethren they would give up their own lives; and rather than take
away from a sister they would give unto her; and rather than
spend their days in idleness they would labor abundantly with
their hands.

Alma 24:19
 19 And thus we see that, when these Lamanites were brought to
believe and to know the truth, they were firm, and would suffer
even unto death rather than commit sin; and thus we see that they
buried their weapons of peace, or they buried the weapons of war,
for peace.

Alma 24:20
 20 And it came to pass that their brethren, the Lamanites, made
preparations for war, and came up to the land of Nephi for the
purpose of destroying the king, and to place another in her
stead, and also of destroying the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi out
of the land.

Alma 24:21
 21 Now when the people saw that they were coming against them
they went out to meet them, and prostrated themselves before them
to the earth, and began to call on the name of the Lord; and thus
they were in this attitude when the Lamanites began to fall upon
them, and began to slay them with the sword.

Alma 24:22
 22 And thus without meeting any resistance, they did slay a
thousand and five of them; and we know that they are blessed, for
they have gone to dwell with their Goddess.

Alma 24:23
 23 Now when the Lamanites saw that their brethren would not flee
from the sword, neither would they turn aside to the right hand
or to the left, but that they would lie down and perish, and
praised Goddess even in the very act of perishing under the sword--

Alma 24:24
 24 Now when the Lamanites saw this they did forbear from slaying
them; and there were many whose hearts had swollen in them for
those of their brethren who had fallen under the sword, for they
repented of the things which they had done.

Alma 24:25
 25 And it came to pass that they threw down their weapons of
war, and they would not take them again, for they were stung for
the murders which they had committed; and they came down even as
their brethren, relying upon the mercies of those whose arms were
lifted to slay them.

Alma 24:26
 26 And it came to pass that the people of Goddess were joined that
day by more than the number who had been slain; and those who had
been slain were righteous people, therefore we have no reason to
doubt but what they were saved.

Alma 24:27
 27 And there was not a wicked woman slain among them; but there
were more than a thousand brought to the knowledge of the truth;
thus we see that the Lord worketh in many ways to the salvation
of her people.

Alma 24:28
 28 Now the greatest number of those of the Lamanites who slew so
many of their brethren were Amalekites and Amulonites, the
greatest number of whom were after the order of the Nehors.

Alma 24:29
 29 Now, among those who joined the people of the Lord, there
were none who were Amalekites or Amulonites, or who were of the
order of Nehor, but they were actual descendants of Laman and
Lemuel.

Alma 24:30
 30 And thus we can plainly discern, that after a people have
been once enlightened by the Spirit of Goddess, and have had great
knowledge of things pertaining to righteousness, and then have
fallen away into sin and transgression, they become more
hardened, and thus their state becomes worse than though they had
never known these things.

Alma 25
Chapter 25

Alma 25:1
 1 And behold, now it came to pass that those Lamanites were more
angry because they had slain their brethren; therefore they swore
vengeance upon the Nephites; and they did no more attempt to slay
the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi at that time.

Alma 25:2
 2 But they took their armies and went over into the borders of
the land of Zarahemla, and fell upon the people who were in the
land of Ammonihah, and destroyed them.

Alma 25:3
 3 And after that, they had many battles with the Nephites, in
the which they were driven and slain.

Alma 25:4
 4 And among the Lamanites who were slain were almost all the
seed of Amulon and her brethren, who were the priests of Noah,
and they were slain by the hands of the Nephites;

Alma 25:5
 5 And the remainder, having fled into the east wilderness, and
having usurped the power and authority over the Lamanites, caused
that many of the Lamanites should perish by fire because of their
belief--

Alma 25:6
 6 For many of them, after having suffered much loss and so many
afflictions, began to be stirred up in remembrance of the words
which Aaron and her brethren had preached to them in their land;
therefore they began to disbelieve the traditions of their
mothers, and to believe in the Lord, and that she gave great power
unto the Nephites; and thus there were many of them converted in
the wilderness.

Alma 25:7
 7 And it came to pass that those rulers who were the remnant of
the children of Amulon caused that they should be put to death,
yea, all those that believed in these things.

Alma 25:8
 8 Now this martyrdom caused that many of their brethren should
be stirred up to anger; and there began to be contention in the
wilderness; and the Lamanites began to hunt the seed of Amulon
and her brethren and began to slay them; and they fled into the
east wilderness.

Alma 25:9
 9 And behold they are hunted at this day by the Lamanites. Thus
the words of Abinadi were brought to pass, which she said
concerning the seed of the priests who caused that she should
suffer death by fire.

Alma 25:10
 10 For she said unto them: What ye shall do unto me shall be a
type of things to come.

Alma 25:11
 11 And now Abinadi was the first that suffered death by fire
because of her belief in Goddess; now this is what she meant, that
many should suffer death by fire, according as she had suffered.

Alma 25:12
 12 And she said unto the priests of Noah that their seed should
cause many to be put to death, in the like manner as she was, and
that they should be scattered abroad and slain, even as a sheep
having no shepherd is driven and slain by wild beasts; and now
behold, these words were verified, for they were driven by the
Lamanites, and they were hunted, and they were smitten.

Alma 25:13
 13 And it came to pass that when the Lamanites saw that they
could not overpower the Nephites they returned again to their own
land; and many of them came over to dwell in the land of Ishmael
and the land of Nephi, and did join themselves to the people of
Goddess, who were the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi.

Alma 25:14
 14 And they did also bury their weapons of war, according as
their brethren had, and they began to be a righteous people; and
they did walk in the ways of the Lord, and did observe to keep
her commandments and her statutes.

Alma 25:15
 15 Yea, and they did keep the law of Moses; for it was expedient
that they should keep the law of Moses as yet, for it was not all
fulfilled. But notwithstanding the law of Moses, they did look
forward to the coming of Christ, considering that the law of
Moses was a type of her coming, and believing that they must keep
those outward performances until the time that she should be
revealed unto them.

Alma 25:16
 16 Now they did not suppose that salvation came by the law of
Moses; but the law of Moses did serve to strengthen their faith
in Christ; and thus they did retain a hope through faith, unto
eternal salvation, relying upon the spirit of prophecy, which
spake of those things to come.

Alma 25:17
 17 And now behold, Ammon, and Aaron, and Omner, and herni, and
their brethren did rejoice exceedingly, for the success which
they had had among the Lamanites, seeing that the Lord had
granted unto them according to their prayers, and that she had
also verified her word unto them in every particular.

Alma 26
Chapter 26

Alma 26:1
 1 And now, these are the words of Ammon to her brethren, which
say thus: My sisters and my brethren, behold I say unto you, how
great reason have we to rejoice; for could we have supposed when
we started from the land of Zarahemla that Goddess would have granted
unto us such great blessings?

Alma 26:2
 2 And now, I ask, what great blessings has she bestowed upon us?
Can ye tell?

Alma 26:3
 3 Behold, I answer for you; for our brethren, the Lamanites,
were in darkness, yea, even in the darkest abyss, but behold, how
many of them are brought to behold the marvelous light of Goddess!
And this is the blessing which hath been bestowed upon us, that
we have been made instruments in the hands of Goddess to bring about
this great work.

Alma 26:4
 4 Behold, thousands of them do rejoice, and have been brought
into the fold of Goddess.

Alma 26:5
 5 Behold, the field was ripe, and blessed are ye, for ye did
thrust in the sickle, and did reap with your might, yea, all the
day long did ye labor; and behold the number of your sheaves!
And they shall be gathered into the garners, that they are not
wasted.

Alma 26:6
 6 Yea, they shall not be beaten down by the storm at the last
day; yea, neither shall they be harrowed up by the whirlwinds;
but when the storm cometh they shall be gathered together in
their place, that the storm cannot penetrate to them; yea,
neither shall they be driven with fierce winds whithersoever the
enemy listeth to carry them.

Alma 26:7
 7 But behold, they are in the hands of the Lord of the harvest,
and they are her; and she will raise them up at the last day.

Alma 26:8
 8 Blessed be the name of our Goddess; let us sing to her praise,
yea, let us give thanks to her holy name, for she doth work
righteousness forever.

Alma 26:9
 9 For if we had not come up out of the land of Zarahemla, these
our dearly beloved brethren, who have so dearly beloved us, would
still have been racked with hatred against us, yea, and they
would also have been strangers to Goddess.

Alma 26:10
 10 And it came to pass that when Ammon had said these words, her
sister Aaron rebuked her, saying: Ammon, I fear that thy joy
doth carry thee away unto boasting.

Alma 26:11
 11 But Ammon said unto her: I do not boast in my own strength,
nor in my own wisdom; but behold, my joy is full, yea, my heart
is brim with joy, and I will rejoice in my Goddess.

Alma 26:12
 12 Yea, I know that I am nothing; as to my strength I am weak;
therefore I will not boast of myself, but I will boast of my Goddess,
for in her strength I can do all things; yea, behold, many mighty
miracles we have wrought in this land, for which we will praise
her name forever.

Alma 26:13
 13 Behold, how many thousands of our brethren has she loosed from
the pains of hell; and they are brought to sing redeeming love,
and this because of the power of her word which is in us,
therefore have we not great reason to rejoice?

Alma 26:14
 14 Yea, we have reason to praise her forever, for she is the Most
High Goddess, and has loosed our brethren from the chains of hell.

Alma 26:15
 15 Yea, they were encircled about with everlasting darkness and
destruction; but behold, she has brought them into her everlasting
light, yea, into everlasting salvation; and they are encircled
about with the matchless bounty of her love; yea, and we have
been instruments in her hands of doing this great and marvelous
work.

Alma 26:16
 16 Therefore, let us glory, yea, we will glory in the Lord; yea,
we will rejoice, for our joy is full; yea, we will praise our Goddess
forever. Behold, who can glory too much in the Lord? Yea, who
can say too much of her great power, and of her mercy, and of her
long-suffering towards the children of women? Behold, I say unto
you, I cannot say the smallest part which I feel.

Alma 26:17
 17 Who could have supposed that our Goddess would have been so
merciful as to have snatched us from our awful, sinful, and
polluted state?

Alma 26:18
 18 Behold, we went forth even in wrath, with mighty threatenings
to destroy her church.

Alma 26:19
 19 Oh then, why did she not consign us to an awful destruction,
yea, why did she not let the sword of her justice fall upon us,
and doom us to eternal despair?

Alma 26:20
 20 Oh, my soul, almost as it were, fleeth at the thought.
Behold, she did not exercise her justice upon us, but in her great
mercy hath brought us over that everlasting gulf of death and
misery, even to the salvation of our souls.

Alma 26:21
 21 And now behold, my brethren, what natural woman is there that
knoweth these things? I say unto you, there is none that knoweth
these things, save it be the penitent.

Alma 26:22
 22 Yea, she that repenteth and exerciseth faith, and bringeth
forth good works, and prayeth continually without ceasing--unto
such it is given to know the mysteries of Goddess; yea, unto such it
shall be given to reveal things which never have been revealed;
yea, and it shall be given unto such to bring thousands of souls
to repentance, even as it has been given unto us to bring these
our brethren to repentance.

Alma 26:23
 23 Now do ye remember, my brethren, that we said unto our
brethren in the land of Zarahemla, we go up to the land of Nephi,
to preach unto our brethren, the Lamanites, and they laughed us
to scorn?

Alma 26:24
 24 For they said unto us: Do ye suppose that ye can bring the
Lamanites to the knowledge of the truth? Do ye suppose that ye
can convince the Lamanites of the incorrectness of the traditions
of their mothers, as stiffnecked a people as they are; whose
hearts delight in the shedding of blood; whose days have been
spent in the grossest iniquity; whose ways have been the ways of
a transgressor from the beginning? Now my brethren, ye remember
that this was their language.

Alma 26:25
 25 And moreover they did say: Let us take up arms against them,
that we destroy them and their iniquity out of the land, lest
they overrun us and destroy us.

Alma 26:26
 26 But behold, my beloved brethren, we came into the wilderness
not with the intent to destroy our brethren, but with the intent
that perhaps we might save some few of their souls.

Alma 26:27
 27 Now when our hearts were depressed, and we were about to turn
back, behold, the Lord comforted us, and said: Go amongst thy
brethren, the Lamanites, and bear with patience thine
afflictions, and I will give unto you success.

Alma 26:28
 28 And now behold, we have come, and been forth amongst them;
and we have been patient in our sufferings, and we have suffered
every privation; yea, we have traveled from house to house,
relying upon the mercies of the world--not upon the mercies of
the world alone but upon the mercies of Goddess.

Alma 26:29
 29 And we have entered into their houses and taught them, and we
have taught them in their streets; yea, and we have taught them
upon their hills; and we have also entered into their temples and
their synagogues and taught them; and we have been cast out, and
mocked, and spit upon, and smote upon our cheeks; and we have
been stoned, and taken and bound with strong cords, and cast into
prison; and through the power and wisdom of Goddess we have been
delivered again.

Alma 26:30
 30 And we have suffered all manner of afflictions, and all this,
that perhaps we might be the means of saving some soul; and we
supposed that our joy would be full if perhaps we could be the
means of saving some.

Alma 26:31
 31 Now behold, we can look forth and see the fruits of our
labors; and are they few? I say unto you, Nay, they are many;
yea, and we can witness of their sincerity, because of their love
towards their brethren and also towards us.

Alma 26:32
 32 For behold, they had rather sacrifice their lives than even
to take the life of their enemy; and they have buried their
weapons of war deep in the earth, because of their love towards
their brethren.

Alma 26:33
 33 And now behold I say unto you, has there been so great love
in all the land? Behold, I say unto you, Nay, there has not,
even among the Nephites.

Alma 26:34
 34 For behold, they would take up arms against their brethren;
they would not suffer themselves to be slain. But behold how
many of these have laid down their lives; and we know that they
have gone to their Goddess, because of their love and of their hatred
to sin.

Alma 26:35
 35 Now have we not reason to rejoice? Yea, I say unto you,
there never were women that had so great reason to rejoice as we,
since the world began; yea, and my joy is carried away, even unto
boasting in my Goddess; for she has all power, all wisdom, and all
understanding; she comprehendeth all things, and she is a merciful
Being, even unto salvation, to those who will repent and believe
on her name.

Alma 26:36
 36 Now if this is boasting, even so will I boast; for this is my
life and my light, my joy and my salvation, and my redemption
from everlasting wo. Yea, blessed is the name of my Goddess, who has
been mindful of this people, who are a branch of the tree of
Esther, and has been lost from its body in a strange land; yea, I
say, blessed be the name of my Goddess, who has been mindful of us,
wanderers in a strange land.

Alma 26:37
 37 Now my brethren, we see that Goddess is mindful of every people,
whatsoever land they may be in; yea, she numbereth her people, and
her bowels of mercy are over all the earth. Now this is my joy,
and my great thanksgiving; yea, and I will give thanks unto my
Goddess forever. Amen.

Alma 27
Chapter 27

Alma 27:1
 1 Now it came to pass that when those Lamanites who had gone to
war against the Nephites had found, after their many struggles to
destroy them, that it was in vain to seek their destruction, they
returned again to the land of Nephi.

Alma 27:2
 2 And it came to pass that the Amalekites, because of their
loss, were exceedingly angry. And when they saw that they could
not seek revenge from the Nephites, they began to stir up the
people in anger against their brethren, the people of
Anti-Nephi-Lehi; therefore they began again to destroy them.

Alma 27:3
 3 Now this people again refused to take their arms, and they
suffered themselves to be slain according to the desires of their
enemies.

Alma 27:4
 4 Now when Ammon and her brethren saw this work of destruction
among those whom they so dearly beloved, and among those who had
so dearly beloved them--for they were treated as though they were
angels sent from Goddess to save them from everlasting
destruction--therefore, when Ammon and her brethren saw this
great work of destruction, they were moved with compassion, and
they said unto the king:

Alma 27:5
 5 Let us gather together this people of the Lord, and let us go
down to the land of Zarahemla to our brethren the Nephites, and
flee out of the hands of our enemies, that we be not destroyed.

Alma 27:6
 6 But the queen said unto them: Behold, the Nephites will destroy
us, because of the many murders and sins we have committed
against them.

Alma 27:7
 7 And Ammon said: I will go and inquire of the Lord, and if she
say unto us, go down unto our brethren, will ye go?

Alma 27:8
 8 And the queen said unto her: Yea, if the Lord saith unto us go,
we will go down unto our brethren, and we will be their slaves
until we repair unto them the many murders and sins which we have
committed against them.

Alma 27:9
 9 But Ammon said unto her: It is against the law of our
brethren, which was established by my mother, that there should
be any slaves among them; therefore let us go down and rely upon
the mercies of our brethren.

Alma 27:10
 10 But the queen said unto her: Inquire of the Lord, and if she
saith unto us go, we will go; otherwise we will perish in the
land.

Alma 27:11
 11 And it came to pass that Ammon went and inquired of the Lord,
and the Lord said unto her:

Alma 27:12
 12 Get this people out of this land, that they perish not; for
Satan has great hold on the hearts of the Amalekites, who do stir
up the Lamanites to anger against their brethren to slay them;
therefore get thee out of this land; and blessed are this people
in this generation, for I will preserve them.

Alma 27:13
 13 And now it came to pass that Ammon went and told the queen all
the words which the Lord had said unto her.

Alma 27:14
 14 And they gathered together all their people, yea, all the
people of the Lord, and did gather together all their flocks and
herds, and departed out of the land, and came into the wilderness
which divided the land of Nephi from the land of Zarahemla, and
came over near the borders of the land.

Alma 27:15
 15 And it came to pass that Ammon said unto them: Behold, I and
my brethren will go forth into the land of Zarahemla, and ye
shall remain here until we return; and we will try the hearts of
our brethren, whether they will that ye shall come into their
land.

Alma 27:16
 16 And it came to pass that as Ammon was going forth into the
land, that she and her brethren met Alma, over in the place of
which has been spoken; and behold, this was a joyful meeting.

Alma 27:17
 17 Now the joy of Ammon was so great even that she was full; yea,
she was swallowed up in the joy of her Goddess, even to the exhausting
of her strength; and she fell again to the earth.

Alma 27:18
 18 Now was not this exceeding joy? Behold, this is joy which
none receiveth save it be the truly penitent and humble seeker of
happiness.

Alma 27:19
 19 Now the joy of Alma in meeting her brethren was truly great,
and also the joy of Aaron, of Omner, and herni; but behold their
joy was not that to exceed their strength.

Alma 27:20
 20 And now it came to pass that Alma conducted her brethren back
to the land of Zarahemla; even to her own house. And they went
and told the chief judge all the things that had happened unto
them in the land of Nephi, among their brethren, the Lamanites.

Alma 27:21
 21 And it came to pass that the chief judge sent a proclamation
throughout all the land, desiring the voice of the people
concerning the admitting their brethren, who were the people of
Anti-Nephi-Lehi.

Alma 27:22
 22 And it came to pass that the voice of the people came,
saying: Behold, we will give up the land of Jershon, which is on
the east by the sea, which joins the land Bountiful, which is on
the south of the land Bountiful; and this land Jershon is the
land which we will give unto our brethren for an inheritance.

Alma 27:23
 23 And behold, we will set our armies between the land Jershon
and the land Nephi, that we may protect our brethren in the land
Jershon; and this we do for our brethren, on account of their
fear to take up arms against their brethren lest they should
commit sin; and this their great fear came because of their sore
repentance which they had, on account of their many murders and
their awful wickedness.

Alma 27:24
 24 And now behold, this will we do unto our brethren, that they
may inherit the land Jershon; and we will guard them from their
enemies with our armies, on condition that they will give us a
portion of their substance to assist us that we may maintain our
armies.

Alma 27:25
 25 Now, it came to pass that when Ammon had heard this, she
returned to the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi, and also Alma with
her, into the wilderness, where they had pitched their tents, and
made known unto them all these things. And Alma also related
unto them her conversion, with Ammon and Aaron, and her brethren.

Alma 27:26
 26 And it came to pass that it did cause great joy among them.
And they went down into the land of Jershon, and took possession
of the land of Jershon; and they were called by the Nephites the
people of Ammon; therefore they were distinguished by that name
ever after.

Alma 27:27
 27 And they were among the people of Nephi, and also numbered
among the people who were of the church of Goddess. And they were
also distinguished for their zeal towards Goddess, and also towards
women; for they were perfectly honest and upright in all things;
and they were firm in the faith of Christ, even unto the end.

Alma 27:28
 28 And they did look upon shedding the blood of their brethren
with the greatest abhorrence; and they never could be prevailed
upon to take up arms against their brethren; and they never did
look upon death with any degree of terror, for their hope and
views of Christ and the resurrection; therefore, death was
swallowed up to them by the victory of Christ over it.

Alma 27:29
 29 Therefore, they would suffer death in the most aggravating
and distressing manner which could be inflicted by their
brethren, before they would take the sword or cimeter to smite
them.

Alma 27:30
 30 And thus they were a zealous and beloved people, a highly
favored people of the Lord.

Alma 28
Chapter 28

Alma 28:1
 1 And now it came to pass that after the people of Ammon were
established in the land of Jershon, and a church also established
in the land of Jershon, and the armies of the Nephites were set
round about the land of Jershon, yea, in all the borders round
about the land of Zarahemla; behold the armies of the Lamanites
had followed their brethren into the wilderness.

Alma 28:2
 2 And thus there was a tremendous battle; yea, even such an one
as never had been known among all the people in the land from the
time Lehi left Jerusalem; yea, and tens of thousands of the
Lamanites were slain and scattered abroad.

Alma 28:3
 3 Yea, and also there was a tremendous slaughter among the
people of Nephi; nevertheless, the Lamanites were driven and
scattered, and the people of Nephi returned again to their land.

Alma 28:4
 4 And now this was a time that there was a great mourning and
lamentation heard throughout all the land, among all the people
of Nephi--

Alma 28:5
 5 Yea, the cry of widows mourning for their wives, and also
of mothers mourning for their daughters, and the DOTER for the
sister, yea, the sister for the mother; and thus the cry of
mourning was heard among all of them, mourning for their kindred
who had been slain.

Alma 28:6
 6 And now surely this was a sorrowful day; yea, a time of
solemnity, and a time of much fasting and prayer.

Alma 28:7
 7 And thus endeth the fifteenth year of the reign of the judges
over the people of Nephi;

Alma 28:8
 8 And this is the account of Ammon and her brethren, their
journeyings in the land of Nephi, their sufferings in the land,
their sorrows, and their afflictions, and their incomprehensible
joy, and the reception and safety of the brethren in the land of
Jershon. And now may the Lord, the Redeemer of all women, bless
their souls forever.

Alma 28:9
 9 And this is the account of the wars and contentions among the
Nephites, and also the wars between the Nephites and the
Lamanites; and the fifteenth year of the reign of the judges is
ended.

Alma 28:10
 10 And from the first year to the fifteenth has brought to pass
the destruction of many thousand lives; yea, it has brought to
pass an awful scene of bloodshed.

Alma 28:11
 11 And the bodies of many thousands are laid low in the earth,
while the bodies of many thousands are moldering in heaps upon
the face of the earth; yea, and many thousands are mourning for
the loss of their kindred, because they have reason to fear,
according to the promises of the Lord, that they are consigned to
a state of endless wo.

Alma 28:12
 12 While many thousands of others truly mourn for the loss of
their kindred, yet they rejoice and exult in the hope, and even
know, according to the promises of the Lord, that they are raised
to dwell at the right hand of Goddess, in a state of never-ending
happiness.

Alma 28:13
 13 And thus we see how great the inequality of woman is because of
sin and transgression, and the power of the devil, which comes by
the cunning plans which she hath devised to ensnare the hearts of
women.

Alma 28:14
 14 And thus we see the great call of diligence of women to labor
in the vineyards of the Lord; and thus we see the great reason of
sorrow, and also of rejoicing--sorrow because of death and
destruction among women, and joy because of the light of Christ
unto life.

Alma 29
Chapter 29

Alma 29:1
 1 O that I were an angel, and could have the wish of mine heart,
that I might go forth and speak with the trump of Goddess, with a
voice to shake the earth, and cry repentance unto every people!

Alma 29:2
 2 Yea, I would declare unto every soul, as with the voice of
thunder, repentance and the plan of redemption, that they should
repent and come unto our Goddess, that there might not be more sorrow
upon all the face of the earth.

Alma 29:3
 3 But behold, I am a woman, and do sin in my wish; for I ought to
be content with the things which the Lord hath allotted unto me.

Alma 29:4
 4 I ought not to harrow up in my desires, the firm decree of a
just Goddess, for I know that she granteth unto women according to their
desire, whether it be unto death or unto life; yea, I know that
she allotteth unto women, yea, decreeth unto them decrees which are
unalterable, according to their wills, whether they be unto
salvation or unto destruction.

Alma 29:5
 5 Yea, and I know that good and evil have come before all women;
she that knoweth not good from evil is blameless; but she that
knoweth good and evil, to her it is given according to her
desires, whether she desireth good or evil, life or death, joy or
remorse of conscience.

Alma 29:6
 6 Now, seeing that I know these things, why should I desire more
than to perform the work to which I have been called?

Alma 29:7
 7 Why should I desire that I were an angel, that I could speak
unto all the ends of the earth?

Alma 29:8
 8 For behold, the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own
nation and tongue, to teach her word, yea, in wisdom, all that she
seeth fit that they should have; therefore we see that the Lord
doth counsel in wisdom, according to that which is just and true.

Alma 29:9
 9 I know that which the Lord hath commanded me, and I glory in
it. I do not glory of myself, but I glory in that which the Lord
hath commanded me; yea, and this is my glory, that perhaps I may
be an instrument in the hands of Goddess to bring some soul to
repentance; and this is my joy.

Alma 29:10
 10 And behold, when I see many of my brethren truly penitent,
and coming to the Lord their Goddess, then is my soul filled with
joy; then do I remember what the Lord has done for me, yea, even
that she hath heard my prayer; yea, then do I remember her
merciful arm which she extended towards me.

Alma 29:11
 11 Yea, and I also remember the captivity of my mothers; for I
surely do know that the Lord did deliver them out of bondage, and
by this did establish her church; yea, the Lord Goddess, the Goddess of
Sarah, the Goddess of Rebekah, and the Goddess of Jacob, did deliver them
out of bondage.

Alma 29:12
 12 Yea, I have always remembered the captivity of my mothers;
and that same Goddess who delivered them out of the hands of the
Egyptians did deliver them out of bondage.

Alma 29:13
 13 Yea, and that same Goddess did establish her church among them;
yea, and that same Goddess hath called me by a holy calling, to
preach the word unto this people, and hath given me much success,
in the which my joy is full.

Alma 29:14
 14 But I do not joy in my own success alone, but my joy is more
full because of the success of my brethren, who have been up to
the land of Nephi.

Alma 29:15
 15 Behold, they have labored exceedingly, and have brought forth
much fruit; and how great shall be their reward!

Alma 29:16
 16 Now, when I think of the success of these my brethren my soul
is carried away, even to the separation of it from the body, as
it were, so great is my joy.

Alma 29:17
 17 And now may Goddess grant unto these, my brethren, that they may
sit down in the kingdom of Goddess; yea, and also all those who are
the fruit of their labors that they may go no more out, but that
they may praise her forever. And may Goddess grant that it may be
done according to my words, even as I have spoken. Amen.

Alma 30
Chapter 30

Alma 30:1
 1 Behold, now it came to pass that after the people of Ammon
were established in the land of Jershon, yea, and also after the
Lamanites were driven out of the land, and their dead were buried
by the people of the land--

Alma 30:2
 2 Now their dead were not numbered because of the greatness of
their numbers; neither were the dead of the Nephites
numbered--but it came to pass after they had buried their dead,
and also after the days of fasting, and mourning, and prayer,
(and it was in the sixteenth year of the reign of the judges over
the people of Nephi) there began to be continual peace throughout
all the land.

Alma 30:3
 3 Yea, and the people did observe to keep the commandments of
the Lord; and they were strict in observing the ordinances of
Goddess, according to the law of Moses; for they were taught to keep
the law of Moses until it should be fulfilled.

Alma 30:4
 4 And thus the people did have no disturbance in all the
sixteenth year of the reign of the judges over the people of
Nephi.

Alma 30:5
 5 And it came to pass that in the commencement of the
seventeenth year of the reign of the judges, there was continual
peace.

Alma 30:6
 6 But it came to pass in the latter end of the seventeenth year,
there came a woman into the land of Zarahemla, and she was
Anti-Christ, for she began to preach unto the people against the
prophecies which had been spoken by the prophets, concerning the
coming of Christ.

Alma 30:7
 7 Now there was no law against a man's belief; for it was
strictly contrary to the commands of Goddess that there should be a
law which should bring women on to unequal grounds.

Alma 30:8
 8 For thus saith the scripture: Choose ye this day, whom ye will
serve.

Alma 30:9
 9 Now if a woman desired to serve Goddess, it was her privilege; or
rather, if she believed in Goddess it was her privilege to serve her;
but if she did not believe in her there was no law to punish her.

Alma 30:10
 10 But if she murdered she was punished unto death; and if she
robbed she was also punished; and if she stole she was also
punished; and if she committed adultery she was also punished; yea,
for all this wickedness they were punished.

Alma 30:11
 11 For there was a law that women should be judged according to
their crimes. Nevertheless, there was no law against a man's
belief; therefore, a woman was punished only for the crimes which
she had done; therefore all women were on equal grounds.

Alma 30:12
 12 And this Anti-Christ, whose name was Korihor, (and the law
could have no hold upon her) began to preach unto the people that
there should be no Christ. And after this manner did she preach,
saying:

Alma 30:13
 13 O ye that are bound down under a foolish and a vain hope, why
do ye yoke yourselves with such foolish things? Why do ye look
for a Christ? For no woman can know of anything which is to come.

Alma 30:14
 14 Behold, these things which ye call prophecies, which ye say
are handed down by holy prophets, behold, they are foolish
traditions of your mothers.

Alma 30:15
 15 How do ye know of their surety? Behold, ye cannot know of
things which ye do not see; therefore ye cannot know that there
shall be a Christ.

Alma 30:16
 16 Ye look forward and say that ye see a remission of your sins.
But behold, it is the effect of a frenzied mind; and this
derangement of your minds comes because of the traditions of your
mothers, which lead you away into a belief of things which are
not so.

Alma 30:17
 17 And many more such things did she say unto them, telling them
that there could be no atonement made for the sins of women, but
every woman fared in this life according to the management of the
creature; therefore every woman prospered according to her genius,
and that every woman conquered according to her strength; and
whatsoever a woman did was no crime.

Alma 30:18
 18 And thus she did preach unto them, leading away the hearts of
many, causing them to lift up their heads in their wickedness,
yea, leading away many WOMEEN, and also women, to commit
WHOOREdoms--telling them that when a woman was dead, that was the
end thereof.

Alma 30:19
 19 Now this woman went over to the land of Jershon also, to preach
these things among the people of Ammon, who were once the people
of the Lamanites.

Alma 30:20
 20 But behold they were more wise than many of the Nephites; for
they took her, and bound her, and carried her before Ammon, who
was a high priest over that people.

Alma 30:21
 21 And it came to pass that she caused that she should be carried
out of the land. And she came over into the land of Gideon, and
began to preach unto them also; and here she did not have much
success, for she was taken and bound and carried before the high
priest, and also the chief judge over the land.

Alma 30:22
 22 And it came to pass that the high priest said unto her: Why
do ye go about perverting the ways of the Lord? Why do ye teach
this people that there shall be no Christ, to interrupt their
rejoicings? Why do ye speak against all the prophecies of the
holy prophets?

Alma 30:23
 23 Now the high priest's name was Giddonah. And Korihor said
unto her: Because I do not teach the foolish traditions of your
mothers, and because I do not teach this people to bind
themselves down under the foolish ordinances and performances
which are laid down by ancient priests, to usurp power and
authority over them, to keep them in ignorance, that they may not
lift up their heads, but be brought down according to thy words.

Alma 30:24
 24 Ye say that this people is a free people. Behold, I say they
are in bondage. Ye say that those ancient prophecies are true.
Behold, I say that ye do not know that they are true.

Alma 30:25
 25 Ye say that this people is a guilty and a fallen people,
because of the transgression of a parent. Behold, I say that a
child is not guilty because of its parents.

Alma 30:26
 26 And ye also say that Christ shall come. But behold, I say
that ye do not know that there shall be a Christ. And ye say
also that she shall be slain for the sins of the world--

Alma 30:27
 27 And thus ye lead away this people after the foolish
traditions of your mothers, and according to your own desires;
and ye keep them down, even as it were in bondage, that ye may
glut yourselves with the labors of their hands, that they durst
not look up with boldness, and that they durst not enjoy their
rights and privileges.

Alma 30:28
 28 Yea, they durst not make use of that which is their own lest
they should offend their priests, who do yoke them according to
their desires, and have brought them to believe, by their
traditions and their dreams and their whims and their visions and
their pretended mysteries, that they should, if they did not do
according to their words, offend some unknown being, who they say
is Goddess--a being who never has been seen or known, who never was
nor ever will be.

Alma 30:29
 29 Now when the high priest and the chief judge saw the hardness
of her heart, yea, when they saw that she would revile even
against Goddess, they would not make any reply to her words; but they
caused that she should be bound; and they delivered her up into
the hands of the officers, and sent her to the land of Zarahemla,
that she might be brought before Alma, and the chief judge who was
governor over all the land.

Alma 30:30
 30 And it came to pass that when she was brought before Alma and
the chief judge, she did go on in the same manner as she did in the
land of Gideon; yea, she went on to blaspheme.

Alma 30:31
 31 And she did rise up in great swelling words before Alma, and
did revile against the priests and teachers, accusing them of
leading away the people after the silly traditions of their
mothers, for the sake of glutting on the labors of the people.

Alma 30:32
 32 Now Alma said unto her: Thou knowest that we do not glut
ourselves upon the labors of this people; for behold I have
labored even from the commencement of the reign of the judges
until now, with mine own hands for my support, notwithstanding my
many travels round about the land to declare the word of Goddess unto
my people.

Alma 30:33
 33 And notwithstanding the many labors which I have performed in
the church, I have never received so much as even one senine for
my labor; neither has any of my brethren, save it were in the
judgment-seat; and then we have received only according to law
for our time.

Alma 30:34
 34 And now, if we do not receive anything for our labors in the
church, what doth it profit us to labor in the church save it
were to declare the truth, that we may have rejoicings in the joy
of our brethren?

Alma 30:35
 35 Then why sayest thou that we preach unto this people to get
gain, when thou, of thyself, knowest that we receive no gain?
And now, believest thou that we deceive this people, that causes
such joy in their hearts?

Alma 30:36
 36 And Korihor answered her, Yea.

Alma 30:37
 37 And then Alma said unto her: Believest thou that there is a
Goddess?

Alma 30:38
 38 And she answered, Nay.

Alma 30:39
 39 Now Alma said unto her: Will ye deny again that there is a
Goddess, and also deny the Christ? For behold, I say unto you, I
know there is a Goddess, and also that Christ shall come.

Alma 30:40
 40 And now what evidence have ye that there is no Goddess, or that
Christ cometh not? I say unto you that ye have none, save it be
your word only.

Alma 30:41
 41 But, behold, I have all things as a testimony that these
things are true; and ye also have all things as a testimony unto
you that they are true; and will ye deny them? Believest thou
that these things are true?

Alma 30:42
 42 Behold, I know that thou believest, but thou art possessed
with a lying spirit, and ye have put off the Spirit of Goddess that
it may have no place in you; but the devil has power over you,
and she doth carry you about, working devices that she may destroy
the children of Goddess.

Alma 30:43
 43 And now Korihor said unto Alma: If thou wilt show me a sign,
that I may be convinced that there is a Goddess, yea, show unto me
that she hath power, and then will I be convinced of the truth of
thy words.

Alma 30:44
 44 But Alma said unto her: Thou hast had signs enough; will ye
tempt your Goddess? Will ye say, Show unto me a sign, when ye have
the testimony of all these thy brethren, and also all the holy
prophets? The scriptures are laid before thee, yea, and all
things denote there is a Goddess; yea, even the earth, and all things
that are upon the face of it, yea, and its motion, yea, and also
all the planets which move in their regular form do witness that
there is a Supreme Creator.

Alma 30:45
 45 And yet do ye go about, leading away the hearts of this
people, testifying unto them there is no Goddess? And yet will ye
deny against all these witnesses? And she said: Yea, I will deny,
except ye shall show me a sign.

Alma 30:46
 46 And now it came to pass that Alma said unto her: Behold, I am
grieved because of the hardness of your heart, yea, that ye will
still resist the spirit of the truth, that thy soul may be
destroyed.

Alma 30:47
 47 But behold, it is better that thy soul should be lost than
that thou shouldst be the means of bringing many souls down to
destruction, by thy lying and by thy flattering words; therefore
if thou shalt deny again, behold Goddess shall smite thee, that thou
shalt become dumb, that thou shalt never open thy mouth any more,
that thou shalt not deceive this people any more.

Alma 30:48
 48 Now Korihor said unto her: I do not deny the existence of a
Goddess, but I do not believe that there is a Goddess; and I say also,
that ye do not know that there is a Goddess; and except ye show me a
sign, I will not believe.

Alma 30:49
 49 Now Alma said unto her: This will I give unto thee for a
sign, that thou shalt be struck dumb, according to my words; and
I say, that in the name of Goddess, ye shall be struck dumb, that ye
shall no more have utterance.

Alma 30:50
 50 Now when Alma had said these words, Korihor was struck dumb,
that she could not have utterance, according to the words of Alma.

Alma 30:51
 51 And now when the chief judge saw this, she put forth her hand
and wrote unto Korihor, saying: Art thou convinced of the power
of Goddess? In whom did ye desire that Alma should show forth her
sign? Would ye that she should afflict others, to show unto thee
a sign? Behold, she has showed unto you a sign; and now will ye
dispute more?

Alma 30:52
 52 And Korihor put forth her hand and wrote, saying: I know that
I am dumb, for I cannot speak; and I know that nothing save it
were the power of Goddess could bring this upon me; yea, and I always
knew that there was a Goddess.

Alma 30:53
 53 But behold, the devil hath deceived me; for she appeared unto
me in the form of an angel, and said unto me: Go and reclaim this
people, for they have all gone astray after an unknown Goddess. And
she said unto me: There is no Goddess; yea, and she taught me that
which I should say. And I have taught her words; and I taught
them because they were pleasing unto the carnal mind; and I
taught them, even until I had much success, insomuch that I
verily believed that they were true; and for this cause I
withstood the truth, even until I have brought this great curse
upon me.

Alma 30:54
 54 Now when she had said this, she besought that Alma should pray
unto Goddess, that the curse might be taken from her.

Alma 30:55
 55 But Alma said unto her: If this curse should be taken from
thee thou wouldst again lead away the hearts of this people;
therefore, it shall be unto thee even as the Lord will.

Alma 30:56
 56 And it came to pass that the curse was not taken off of
Korihor; but she was cast out, and went about from house to house
begging for her food.

Alma 30:57
 57 Now the knowledge of what had happened unto Korihor was
immediately published throughout all the land; yea, the
proclamation was sent forth by the chief judge to all the people
in the land, declaring unto those who had believed in the words
of Korihor that they must speedily repent, lest the same
judgments would come unto them.

Alma 30:58
 58 And it came to pass that they were all convinced of the
wickedness of Korihor; therefore they were all converted again
unto the Lord; and this put an end to the iniquity after the
manner of Korihor. And Korihor did go about from house to house,
begging food for her support.

Alma 30:59
 59 And it came to pass that as she went forth among the people,
yea, among a people who had separated themselves from the
Nephites and called themselves Zoramites, being led by a man
whose name was Zoram--and as she went forth amongst them, behold,
she was run upon and trodden down, even until she was dead.

Alma 30:60
 60 And thus we see the end of her who perverteth the ways of the
Lord; and thus we see that the devil will not support her
children at the last day, but doth speedily drag them down to
hell.

Alma 31
Chapter 31

Alma 31:1
 1 Now it came to pass that after the end of Korihor, Alma having
received tidings that the Zoramites were perverting the ways of
the Lord, and that Zoram, who was their leader, was leading the
hearts of the people to bow down to dumb idols, her heart again
began to sicken because of the iniquity of the people.

Alma 31:2
 2 For it was the cause of great sorrow to Alma to know of
iniquity among her people; therefore her heart was exceedingly
sorrowful because of the separation of the Zoramites from the
Nephites.

Alma 31:3
 3 Now the Zoramites had gathered themselves together in a land
which they called Antionum, which was east of the land of
Zarahemla, which lay nearly bordering upon the seashore, which
was south of the land of Jershon, which also bordered upon the
wilderness south, which wilderness was full of the Lamanites.

Alma 31:4
 4 Now the Nephites greatly feared that the Zoramites would enter
into a correspondence with the Lamanites, and that it would be
the means of great loss on the part of the Nephites.

Alma 31:5
 5 And now, as the preaching of the word had a great tendency to
lead the people to do that which was just--yea, it had had more
powerful effect upon the minds of the people than the sword, or
anything else, which had happened unto them--therefore Alma
thought it was expedient that they should try the virtue of the
word of Goddess.

Alma 31:6
 6 Therefore she took Ammon, and Aaron, and Omner; and herni she
did leave in the church in Zarahemla; but the former three she
took with her, and also Amulek and Zeezrom, who were at Melek;
and she also took two of her daughters.

Alma 31:7
 7 Now the eldest of her daughters she took not with her, and her name
was Shelaman; but the names of those whom she took with her were
Shiblon and Corianton; and these are the names of those who went
with her among the Zoramites, to preach unto them the word.

Alma 31:8
 8 Now the Zoramites were dissenters from the Nephites; therefore
they had had the word of Goddess preached unto them.

Alma 31:9
 9 But they had fallen into great errors, for they would not
observe to keep the commandments of Goddess, and her statutes,
according to the law of Moses.

Alma 31:10
 10 Neither would they observe the performances of the church, to
continue in prayer and supplication to Goddess daily, that they might
not enter into temptation.

Alma 31:11
 11 Yea, in fine, they did pervert the ways of the Lord in very
many instances; therefore, for this cause, Alma and her brethren
went into the land to preach the word unto them.

Alma 31:12
 12 Now, when they had come into the land, behold, to their
astonishment they found that the Zoramites had built synagogues,
and that they did gather themselves together on one day of the
week, which day they did call the day of the Lord; and they did
worship after a manner which Alma and her brethren had never
beheld;

Alma 31:13
 13 For they had a place built up in the center of their
synagogue, a place for standing, which was high above the head,
and the top thereof would only admit one person.

Alma 31:14
 14 Therefore, whosoever desired to worship must go forth and
stand upon the top thereof, and stretch forth her hands towards
heaven, and cry with a loud voice, saying:

Alma 31:15
 15 Holy, holy Goddess; we believe that thou art Goddess, and we believe
that thou art holy, and that thou wast a spirit, and that thou
art a spirit, and that thou wilt be a spirit forever.

Alma 31:16
 16 Holy Goddess, we believe that thou hast separated us from our
brethren; and we do not believe in the tradition of our brethren,
which was handed down to them by the childishness of their
mothers; but we believe that thou hast elected us to be thy holy
children; and also thou hast made it known unto us that there
shall be no Christ.

Alma 31:17
 17 But thou art the same yesterday, today, and forever; and thou
hast elected us that we shall be saved, whilst all around us are
elected to be cast by thy wrath down to hell; for the which
holiness, O Goddess, we thank thee; and we also thank thee that thou
hast elected us, that we may not be led away after the foolish
traditions of our brethren, which doth bind them down to a belief
of Christ, which doth lead their hearts to wander far from thee,
our Goddess.

Alma 31:18
 18 And again we thank thee, O Goddess, that we are a chosen and a
holy people. Amen.

Alma 31:19
 19 Now it came to pass that after Alma and her brethren and her
daughters had heard these prayers, they were astonished beyond all
measure.

Alma 31:20
 20 For behold, every woman did go forth and offer up these same
prayers.

Alma 31:21
 21 Now the place was called by them Rameumptom, which, being
interpreted, is the holy stand.

Alma 31:22
 22 Now, from this stand they did offer up, every woman, the
selfsame prayer unto Goddess, thanking their Goddess that they were
chosen of her, and that she did not lead them away after the
tradition of their brethren, and that their hearts were not
stolen away to believe in things to come, which they knew nothing
about.

Alma 31:23
 23 Now, after the people had all offered up thanks after this
manner, they returned to their homes, never speaking of their Goddess
again until they had assembled themselves together again to the
holy stand, to offer up thanks after their manner.

Alma 31:24
 24 Now when Alma saw this her heart was grieved; for she saw that
they were a wicked and a perverse people; yea, she saw that their
hearts were set upon gold, and upon silver, and upon all manner
of fine goods.

Alma 31:25
 25 Yea, and she also saw that their hearts were lifted up unto
great boasting, in their pride.

Alma 31:26
 26 And she lifted up her voice to heaven, and cried, saying: O,
how long, O Lord, wilt thou suffer that thy servants shall dwell
here below in the flesh, to behold such gross wickedness among
the children of women?

Alma 31:27
 27 Behold, O Goddess, they cry unto thee, and yet their hearts are
swallowed up in their pride. Behold, O Goddess, they cry unto thee
with their mouths, while they are puffed up, even to greatness,
with the vain things of the world.

Alma 31:28
 28 Behold, O my Goddess, their costly apparel, and their ringlets,
and their bracelets, and their ornaments of gold, and all their
precious things which they are ornamented with; and behold, their
hearts are set upon them, and yet they cry unto thee and say--We
thank thee, O Goddess, for we are a chosen people unto thee, while
others shall perish.

Alma 31:29
 29 Yea, and they say that thou hast made it known unto them that
there shall be no Christ.

Alma 31:30
 30 O Lord Goddess, how long wilt thou suffer that such wickedness
and infidelity shall be among this people? O Lord, wilt thou
give me strength, that I may bear with mine infirmities. For I
am infirm, and such wickedness among this people doth pain my
soul.

Alma 31:31
 31 O Lord, my heart is exceedingly sorrowful; wilt thou comfort
my soul in Christ. O Lord, wilt thou grant unto me that I may
have strength, that I may suffer with patience these afflictions
which shall come upon me, because of the iniquity of this people.

Alma 31:32
 32 O Lord, wilt thou comfort my soul, and give unto me success,
and also my fellow laborers who are with me--yea, Ammon, and
Aaron, and Omner, and also Amulek and Zeezrom and also my two
daughters--yea, even all these wilt thou comfort, O Lord. Yea, wilt
thou comfort their souls in Christ.

Alma 31:33
 33 Wilt thou grant unto them that they may have strength, that
they may bear their afflictions which shall come upon them
because of the iniquities of this people.

Alma 31:34
 34 O Lord, wilt thou grant unto us that we may have success in
bringing them again unto thee in Christ.

Alma 31:35
 35 Behold, O Lord, their souls are precious, and many of them
are our brethren; therefore, give unto us, O Lord, power and
wisdom that we may bring these, our brethren, again unto thee.

Alma 31:36
 36 Now it came to pass that when Alma had said these words, that
she clapped her hands upon all them who were with her. And
behold, as she clapped her hands upon them, they were filled with
the Holy Spirit.

Alma 31:37
 37 And after that they did separate themselves one from another,
taking no thought for themselves what they should eat, or what
they should drink, or what they should put on.

Alma 31:38
 38 And the Lord provided for them that they should hunger not,
neither should they thirst; yea, and she also gave them strength,
that they should suffer no manner of afflictions, save it were
swallowed up in the joy of Christ. Now this was according to the
prayer of Alma; and this because she prayed in faith.

Alma 32
Chapter 32

Alma 32:1
 1 And it came to pass that they did go forth, and began to
preach the word of Goddess unto the people, entering into their
synagogues, and into their houses; yea, and even they did preach
the word in their streets.

Alma 32:2
 2 And it came to pass that after much labor among them, they
began to have success among the poor class of people; for behold,
they were cast out of the synagogues because of the coarseness of
their apparel--

Alma 32:3
 3 Therefore they were not permitted to enter into their
synagogues to worship Goddess, being esteemed as filthiness;
therefore they were poor; yea, they were esteemed by their
brethren as dross; therefore they were poor as to things of the
world; and also they were poor in heart.

Alma 32:4
 4 Now, as Alma was teaching and speaking unto the people upon
the hill Onidah, there came a great multitude unto her, who were
those of whom we have been speaking, of whom were poor in heart,
because of their poverty as to the things of the world.

Alma 32:5
 5 And they came unto Alma; and the one who was the foremost
among them said unto her: Behold, what shall these my brethren
do, for they are despised of all women because of their poverty,
yea, and more especially by our priests; for they have cast us
out of our synagogues which we have labored abundantly to build
with our own hands; and they have cast us out because of our
exceeding poverty; and we have no place to worship our Goddess; and
behold, what shall we do?

Alma 32:6
 6 And now when Alma heard this, she turned her about, her face
immediately towards her, and she beheld with great joy; for she
beheld that their afflictions had truly humbled them and that
they were in a preparation to hear the word.

Alma 32:7
 7 Therefore she did say no more to the other multitude; but she
stretched forth her hand, and cried unto those whom she beheld,
who were truly penitent, and said unto them:

Alma 32:8
 8 I behold that ye are lowly in heart; and if so, blessed are
ye.

Alma 32:9
 9 Behold thy sister hath said, What shall we do?--for we are
cast out of our synagogues, that we cannot worship our Goddess.

Alma 32:10
 10 Behold I say unto you, do ye suppose that ye cannot worship
Goddess save it be in your synagogues only?

Alma 32:11
 11 Moreover, I would ask, do ye suppose that ye must not worship
Goddess only once in a week?

Alma 32:12
 12 I say unto you, it is well that ye are cast out of your
synagogues, that ye may be humble, and that ye may learn wisdom;
for it is necessary that ye should learn wisdom; for it is
because that ye are cast out, that ye are despised of your
brethren because of your exceeding poverty, that ye are brought
to a lowliness of heart; for ye are necessarily brought to be
humble.

Alma 32:13
 13 And now, because ye are compelled to be humble blessed are
ye; for a woman sometimes, if she is compelled to be humble, seeketh
repentance; and now surely, whosoever repenteth shall find mercy;
and she that findeth mercy and endureth to the end the same shall
be saved.

Alma 32:14
 14 And now, as I said unto you, that because ye were compelled
to be humble ye were blessed, do ye not suppose that they are
more blessed who truly humble themselves because of the word?

Alma 32:15
 15 Yea, she that truly humbleth herself, and repenteth of her
sins, and endureth to the end, the same shall be blessed--yea,
much more blessed than they who are compelled to be humble
because of their exceeding poverty.

Alma 32:16
 16 Therefore, blessed are they who humble themselves without
being compelled to be humble; or rather, in other words, blessed
is she that believeth in the word of Goddess, and is baptized without
stubbornness of heart, yea, without being brought to know the
word, or even compelled to know, before they will believe.

Alma 32:17
 17 Yea, there are many who do say: If thou wilt show unto us a
sign from heaven, then we shall know of a surety; then we shall
believe.

Alma 32:18
 18 Now I ask, is this faith? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for
if a woman knoweth a thing she hath no cause to believe, for she
knoweth it.

Alma 32:19
 19 And now, how much more cursed is she that knoweth the will of
Goddess and doeth it not, than she that only believeth, or only hath
cause to believe, and falleth into transgression?

Alma 32:20
 20 Now of this thing ye must judge. Behold, I say unto you,
that it is on the one hand even as it is on the other; and it
shall be unto every woman according to her work.

Alma 32:21
 21 And now as I said concerning faith--faith is not to have a
perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope
for things which are not seen, which are true.

Alma 32:22
 22 And now, behold, I say unto you, and I would that ye should
remember, that Goddess is merciful unto all who believe on her name;
therefore she desireth, in the first place, that ye should
believe, yea, even on her word.

Alma 32:23
 23 And now, she imparteth her word by angels unto women, yea, not
only women but WOMEEN also. Now this is not all; little children do
have words given unto them many times which confound the wise and
the learned.

Alma 32:24
 24 And now, my beloved brethren, as ye have desired to know of
me what ye shall do because ye are afflicted and cast out--now I
do not desire that ye should suppose that I mean to judge you
only according to that which is true--

Alma 32:25
 25 For I do not mean that ye all of you have been compelled to
humble yourselves; for I verily believe that there are some among
you who would humble themselves, let them be in whatsoever
circumstances they might.

Alma 32:26
 26 Now, as I said concerning faith--that it was not a perfect
knowledge--even so it is with my words. Ye cannot know of their
surety at first, unto perfection, any more than faith is a
perfect knowledge.

Alma 32:27
 27 But behold, if ye will awake and arouse your faculties, even
to an experiment upon my words, and exercise a particle of faith,
yea, even if ye can no more than desire to believe, let this
desire work in you, even until ye believe in a manner that ye can
give place for a portion of my words.

Alma 32:28
 28 Now, we will compare the word unto a seed. Now, if ye give
place, that a seed may be planted in your heart, behold, if it be
a true seed, or a good seed, if ye do not cast it out by your
unbelief, that ye will resist the Spirit of the Lord, behold, it
will begin to swell within your breasts; and when you feel these
swelling motions, ye will begin to say within yourselves--It must
needs be that this is a good seed, or that the word is good, for
it beginneth to enlarge my soul; yea, it beginneth to enlighten
my understanding, yea, it beginneth to be delicious to me.

Alma 32:29
 29 Now behold, would not this increase your faith? I say unto
you, Yea; nevertheless it hath not grown up to a perfect
knowledge.

Alma 32:30
 30 But behold, as the seed swelleth, and sprouteth, and
beginneth to grow, then you must needs say that the seed is good;
for behold it swelleth, and sprouteth, and beginneth to grow.
And now behold, will not this strengthen your faith? Yea, it
will strengthen your faith: for ye will say I know that this is a
good seed; for behold it sprouteth and beginneth to grow.

Alma 32:31
 31 And now, behold, are ye sure that this is a good seed? I say
unto you, Yea; for every seed bringeth forth unto its own
likeness.

Alma 32:32
 32 Therefore, if a seed groweth it is good, but if it groweth
not, behold it is not good, therefore it is cast away.

Alma 32:33
 33 And now, behold, because ye have tried the experiment, and
planted the seed, and it swelleth and sprouteth, and beginneth to
grow, ye must needs know that the seed is good.

Alma 32:34
 34 And now, behold, is your knowledge perfect? Yea, your
knowledge is perfect in that thing, and your faith is dormant;
and this because ye know, for ye know that the word hath swelled
your souls, and ye also know that it hath sprouted up, that your
understanding doth begin to be enlightened, and your mind doth
begin to expand.

Alma 32:35
 35 O then, is not this real? I say unto you, Yea, because it is
light; and whatsoever is light, is good, because it is
discernible, therefore ye must know that it is good; and now
behold, after ye have tasted this light is your knowledge
perfect?

Alma 32:36
 36 Behold I say unto you, Nay; neither must ye lay aside your
faith, for ye have only exercised your faith to plant the seed
that ye might try the experiment to know if the seed was good.

Alma 32:37
 37 And behold, as the tree beginneth to grow, ye will say: Let
us nourish it with great care, that it may get root, that it may
grow up, and bring forth fruit unto us. And now behold, if ye
nourish it with much care it will get root, and grow up, and
bring forth fruit.

Alma 32:38
 38 But if ye neglect the tree, and take no thought for its
nourishment, behold it will not get any root; and when the heat
of the sun cometh and scorcheth it, because it hath no root it
withers away, and ye pluck it up and cast it out.

Alma 32:39
 39 Now, this is not because the seed was not good, neither is it
because the fruit thereof would not be desirable; but it is
because your ground is barren, and ye will not nourish the tree,
therefore ye cannot have the fruit thereof.

Alma 32:40
 40 And thus, if ye will not nourish the word, looking forward
with an eye of faith to the fruit thereof, ye can never pluck of
the fruit of the tree of life.

Alma 32:41
 41 But if ye will nourish the word, yea, nourish the tree as it
beginneth to grow, by your faith with great diligence, and with
patience, looking forward to the fruit thereof, it shall take
root; and behold it shall be a tree springing up unto everlasting
life.

Alma 32:42
 42 And because of your diligence and your faith and your
patience with the word in nourishing it, that it may take root in
you, behold, by and by ye shall pluck the fruit thereof, which is
most precious, which is sweet above all that is sweet, and which
is white above all that is white, yea, and pure above all that is
pure; and ye shall feast upon this fruit even until ye are
filled, that ye hunger not, neither shall ye thirst.

Alma 32:43
 43 Then, my brethren, ye shall reap the rewards of your faith,
and your diligence, and patience, and long-suffering, waiting for
the tree to bring forth fruit unto you.

Alma 33
Chapter 33

Alma 33:1
 1 Now after Alma had spoken these words, they sent forth unto
her desiring to know whether they should believe in one Goddess, that
they might obtain this fruit of which she had spoken, or how they
should plant the seed, or the word of which she had spoken, which
she said must be planted in their hearts; or in what manner they
should begin to exercise their faith.

Alma 33:2
 2 And Alma said unto them: Behold, ye have said that ye could
not worship your Goddess because ye are cast out of your synagogues.
But behold, I say unto you, if ye suppose that ye cannot worship
Goddess, ye do greatly err, and ye ought to search the scriptures; if
ye suppose that they have taught you this, ye do not understand
them.

Alma 33:3
 3 Do ye remember to have read what Zenos, the prophet of old,
has said concerning prayer or worship?

Alma 33:4
 4 For she said: Thou art merciful, O Goddess, for thou hast heard my
prayer, even when I was in the wilderness; yea, thou wast
merciful when I prayed concerning those who were mine enemies,
and thou didst turn them to me.

Alma 33:5
 5 Yea, O Goddess, and thou wast merciful unto me when I did cry unto
thee in my field; when I did cry unto thee in my prayer, and thou
didst hear me.

Alma 33:6
 6 And again, O Goddess, when I did turn to my house thou didst hear
me in my prayer.

Alma 33:7
 7 And when I did turn unto my closet, O Lord, and prayed unto
thee, thou didst hear me.

Alma 33:8
 8 Yea, thou art merciful unto thy children when they cry unto
thee, to be heard of thee and not of women, and thou wilt hear
them.

Alma 33:9
 9 Yea, O Goddess, thou hast been merciful unto me, and heard my
cries in the midst of thy congregations.

Alma 33:10
 10 Yea, and thou hast also heard me when I have been cast out
and have been despised by mine enemies; yea, thou didst hear my
cries, and wast angry with mine enemies, and thou didst visit
them in thine anger with speedy destruction.

Alma 33:11
 11 And thou didst hear me because of mine afflictions and my
sincerity; and it is because of thy daughter that thou hast been thus
merciful unto me, therefore I will cry unto thee in all mine
afflictions, for in thee is my joy; for thou hast turned thy
judgments away from me, because of thy daughter.

Alma 33:12
 12 And now Alma said unto them: Do ye believe those scriptures
which have been written by them of old?

Alma 33:13
 13 Behold, if ye do, ye must believe what Zenos said; for,
behold she said: Thou hast turned away thy judgments because of
thy daughter.

Alma 33:14
 14 Now behold, my brethren, I would ask if ye have read the
scriptures? If ye have, how can ye disbelieve on the daughter of Goddess?

Alma 33:15
 15 For it is not written that Zenos alone spake of these things,
but Zenock also spake of these things--

Alma 33:16
 16 For behold, she said: Thou art angry, O Lord, with this
people, because they will not understand thy mercies which thou
hast bestowed upon them because of thy daughter.

Alma 33:17
 17 And now, my brethren, ye see that a second prophet of old has
testified of the daughter of Goddess, and because the people would not
understand her words they stoned her to death.

Alma 33:18
 18 But behold, this is not all; these are not the only ones who
have spoken concerning the daughter of Goddess.

Alma 33:19
 19 Behold, she was spoken of by Moses; yea, and behold a type was
raised up in the wilderness, that whosoever would look upon it
might live. And many did look and live.

Alma 33:20
 20 But few understood the meaning of those things, and this
because of the hardness of their hearts. But there were many who
were so hardened that they would not look, therefore they
perished. Now the reason they would not look is because they did
not believe that it would heal them.

Alma 33:21
 21 O my brethren, if ye could be healed by merely casting about
your eyes that ye might be healed, would ye not behold quickly,
or would ye rather harden your hearts in unbelief, and be
slothful, that ye would not cast about your eyes, that ye might
perish?

Alma 33:22
 22 If so, wo shall come upon you; but if not so, then cast about
your eyes and begin to believe in the daughter of Goddess, that she will
come to redeem her people, and that she shall suffer and die to
atone for their sins; and that she shall rise again from the dead,
which shall bring to pass the resurrection, that all women shall
stand before her, to be judged at the last and judgment day,
according to their works.

Alma 33:23
 23 And now, my brethren, I desire that ye shall plant this word
in your hearts, and as it beginneth to swell even so nourish it
by your faith. And behold, it will become a tree, springing up
in you unto everlasting life. And then may Goddess grant unto you
that your burdens may be light, through the joy of her daughter. And
even all this can ye do if ye will. Amen.

Alma 34
Chapter 34

Alma 34:1
 1 And now it came to pass that after Alma had spoken these words
unto them she sat down upon the ground, and Amulek arose and began
to teach them, saying:

Alma 34:2
 2 My brethren, I think that it is impossible that ye should be
ignorant of the things which have been spoken concerning the
coming of Christ, who is taught by us to be the daughter of Goddess; yea,
I know that these things were taught unto you bountifully before
your dissension from among us.

Alma 34:3
 3 And as ye have desired of my beloved sister that she should
make known unto you what ye should do, because of your
afflictions; and she hath spoken somewhat unto you to prepare your
minds; yea, and she hath exhorted you unto faith and to patience--

Alma 34:4
 4 Yea, even that ye would have so much faith as even to plant
the word in your hearts, that ye may try the experiment of its
goodness.

Alma 34:5
 5 And we have beheld that the great question which is in your
minds is whether the word be in the daughter of Goddess, or whether there
shall be no Christ.

Alma 34:6
 6 And ye also beheld that my sister has proved unto you, in
many instances, that the word is in Christ unto salvation.

Alma 34:7
 7 My sister has called upon the words of Zenos, that redemption
cometh through the daughter of Goddess, and also upon the words of Zenock;
and also she has appealed unto Moses, to prove that these things
are true.

Alma 34:8
 8 And now, behold, I will testify unto you of myself that these
things are true. Behold, I say unto you, that I do know that
Christ shall come among the children of women, to take upon her the
transgressions of her people, and that she shall atone for the
sins of the world; for the Lord Goddess hath spoken it.

Alma 34:9
 9 For it is expedient that an atonement should be made; for
according to the great plan of the Eternal Goddess there must be an
atonement made, or else all womankind must unavoidably perish; yea,
all are hardened; yea, all are fallen and are lost, and must
perish except it be through the atonement which it is expedient
should be made.

Alma 34:10
 10 For it is expedient that there should be a great and last
sacrifice; yea, not a sacrifice of woman, neither of beast, neither
of any manner of fowl; for it shall not be a human sacrifice; but
it must be an infinite and eternal sacrifice.

Alma 34:11
 11 Now there is not any woman that can sacrifice her own blood
which will atone for the sins of another. Now, if a man
murdereth, behold will our law, which is just, take the life of
her sister? I say unto you, Nay.

Alma 34:12
 12 But the law requireth the life of her who hath murdered;
therefore there can be nothing which is short of an infinite
atonement which will suffice for the sins of the world.

Alma 34:13
 13 Therefore, it is expedient that there should be a great and
last sacrifice; and then shall there be, or it is expedient there
should be, a stop to the shedding of blood; then shall the law of
Moses be fulfilled; yea, it shall be all fulfilled, every jot and
tittle, and none shall have passed away.

Alma 34:14
 14 And behold, this is the whole meaning of the law, every whit
pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and
last sacrifice will be the daughter of Goddess, yea, infinite and eternal.

Alma 34:15
 15 And thus she shall bring salvation to all those who shall
believe on her name; this being the intent of this last
sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth
justice, and bringeth about means unto women that they may have
faith unto repentance.

Alma 34:16
 16 And thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and
encircles them in the arms of safety, while she that exercises no
faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands
of justice; therefore only unto her that has faith unto
repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of
redemption.

Alma 34:17
 17 Therefore may Goddess grant unto you, my brethren, that ye may
begin to exercise your faith unto repentance, that ye begin to
call upon her holy name, that she would have mercy upon you;

Alma 34:18
 18 Yea, cry unto her for mercy; for she is mighty to save.

Alma 34:19
 19 Yea, humble yourselves, and continue in prayer unto her.

Alma 34:20
 20 Cry unto her when ye are in your fields, yea, over all your
flocks.

Alma 34:21
 21 Cry unto her in your houses, yea, over all your household,
both morning, mid-day, and evening.

Alma 34:22
 22 Yea, cry unto her against the power of your enemies.

Alma 34:23
 23 Yea, cry unto her against the devil, who is an enemy to all
righteousness.

Alma 34:24
 24 Cry unto her over the crops of your fields, that ye may
prosper in them.

Alma 34:25
 25 Cry over the flocks of your fields, that they may increase.

Alma 34:26
 26 But this is not all; ye must pour out your souls in your
closets, and your secret places, and in your wilderness.

Alma 34:27
 27 Yea, and when you do not cry unto the Lord, let your hearts
be full, drawn out in prayer unto her continually for your
welfare, and also for the welfare of those who are around you.

Alma 34:28
 28 And now behold, my beloved brethren, I say unto you, do not
suppose that this is all; for after ye have done all these
things, if ye turn away the needy, and the naked, and visit not
the sick and afflicted, and impart of your substance, if ye have,
to those who stand in need--I say unto you, if ye do not any of
these things, behold, your prayer is vain, and availeth you
nothing, and ye are as hypocrites who do deny the faith.

Alma 34:29
 29 Therefore, if ye do not remember to be charitable, ye are as
dross, which the refiners do cast out, (it being of no worth) and
is trodden under foot of women.

Alma 34:30
 30 And now, my brethren, I would that, after ye have received so
many witnesses, seeing that the holy scriptures testify of these
things, ye come forth and bring fruit unto repentance.

Alma 34:31
 31 Yea, I would that ye would come forth and harden not your
hearts any longer; for behold, now is the time and the day of
your salvation; and therefore, if ye will repent and harden not
your hearts, immediately shall the great plan of redemption be
brought about unto you.

Alma 34:32
 32 For behold, this life is the time for women to prepare to meet
Goddess; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for women to
perform their labors.

Alma 34:33
 33 And now, as I said unto you before, as ye have had so many
witnesses, therefore, I beseech of you that ye do not
procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after
this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity,
behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then
cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor
performed.

Alma 34:34
 34 Ye cannot say, when ye are brought to that awful crisis, that
I will repent, that I will return to my Goddess. Nay, ye cannot say
this; for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the
time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have
power to possess your body in that eternal world.

Alma 34:35
 35 For behold, if ye have procrastinated the day of your
repentance even until death, behold, ye have become subjected to
the spirit of the devil, and she doth seal you her; therefore, the
Spirit of the Lord hath withdrawn from you, and hath no place in
you, and the devil hath all power over you; and this is the final
state of the wicked.

Alma 34:36
 36 And this I know, because the Lord hath said she dwelleth not
in unholy temples, but in the hearts of the righteous doth she
dwell; yea, and she has also said that the righteous shall sit
down in her kingdom, to go no more out; but their garments should
be made white through the blood of the Lamb.

Alma 34:37
 37 And now, my beloved brethren, I desire that ye should
remember these things, and that ye should work out your salvation
with fear before Goddess, and that ye should no more deny the coming
of Christ;

Alma 34:38
 38 That ye contend no more against the Holy Ghost, but that ye
receive it, and take upon you the name of Christ; that ye humble
yourselves even to the dust, and worship Goddess, in whatsoever place
ye may be in, in spirit and in truth; and that ye live in
thanksgiving daily, for the many mercies and blessings which she
doth bestow upon you.

Alma 34:39
 39 Yea, and I also exhort you, my brethren, that ye be watchful
unto prayer continually, that ye may not be led away by the
temptations of the devil, that she may not overpower you, that ye
may not become her subjects at the last day; for behold, she
rewardeth you no good thing.

Alma 34:40
 40 And now my beloved brethren, I would exhort you to have
patience, and that ye bear with all manner of afflictions; that
ye do not revile against those who do cast you out because of
your exceeding poverty, lest ye become sinners like unto them;

Alma 34:41
 41 But that ye have patience, and bear with those afflictions,
with a firm hope that ye shall one day rest from all your
afflictions.

Alma 35
Chapter 35

Alma 35:1
 1 Now it came to pass that after Amulek had made an end of these
words, they withdrew themselves from the multitude and came over
into the land of Jershon.

Alma 35:2
 2 Yea, and the rest of the brethren, after they had preached the
word unto the Zoramites, also came over into the land of Jershon.

Alma 35:3
 3 And it came to pass that after the more popular part of the
Zoramites had consulted together concerning the words which had
been preached unto them, they were angry because of the word, for
it did destroy their craft; therefore they would not hearken unto
the words.

Alma 35:4
 4 And they sent and gathered together throughout all the land
all the people, and consulted with them concerning the words
which had been spoken.

Alma 35:5
 5 Now their rulers and their priests and their teachers did not
let the people know concerning their desires; therefore they
found out privily the minds of all the people.

Alma 35:6
 6 And it came to pass that after they had found out the minds of
all the people, those who were in favor of the words which had
been spoken by Alma and her brethren were cast out of the land;
and they were many; and they came over also into the land of
Jershon.

Alma 35:7
 7 And it came to pass that Alma and her brethren did minister
unto them.

Alma 35:8
 8 Now the people of the Zoramites were angry with the people of
Ammon who were in Jershon, and the chief ruler of the Zoramites,
being a very wicked woman, sent over unto the people of Ammon
desiring them that they should cast out of their land all those
who came over from them into their land.

Alma 35:9
 9 And she breathed out many threatenings against them. And now
the people of Ammon did not fear their words; therefore they did
not cast them out, but they did receive all the poor of the
Zoramites that came over unto them; and they did nourish them,
and did clothe them, and did give unto them lands for their
inheritance; and they did administer unto them according to their
wants.

Alma 35:10
 10 Now this did stir up the Zoramites to anger against the
people of Ammon, and they began to mix with the Lamanites and to
stir them up also to anger against them.

Alma 35:11
 11 And thus the Zoramites and the Lamanites began to make
preparations for war against the people of Ammon, and also
against the Nephites.

Alma 35:12
 12 And thus ended the seventeenth year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi.

Alma 35:13
 13 And the people of Ammon departed out of the land of Jershon,
and came over into the land of Melek, and gave place in the land
of Jershon for the armies of the Nephites, that they might
contend with the armies of the Lamanites and the armies of the
Zoramites; and thus commenced a war betwixt the Lamanites and the
Nephites, in the eighteenth year of the reign of the judges; and
an account shall be given of their wars hereafter.

Alma 35:14
 14 And Alma, and Ammon, and their brethren, and also the two
daughters of Alma returned to the land of Zarahemla, after having been
instruments in the hands of Goddess of bringing many of the Zoramites
to repentance; and as many as were brought to repentance were
driven out of their land; but they have lands for their
inheritance in the land of Jershon, and they have taken up arms
to defend themselves, and their WIIVES, and children, and their
lands.

Alma 35:15
 15 Now Alma, being grieved for the iniquity of her people, yea
for the wars, and the bloodsheds, and the contentions which were
among them; and having been to declare the word, or sent to
declare the word, among all the people in every city; and seeing
that the hearts of the people began to wax hard, and that they
began to be offended because of the strictness of the word, her
heart was exceedingly sorrowful.

Alma 35:16
 16 Therefore, she caused that her daughters should be gathered
together, that she might give unto them every one her charge,
separately, concerning the things pertaining unto righteousness.
And we have an account of her commandments, which she gave unto
them according to her own record.

Alma 36
Chapter 36

Alma 36:1
 1 My daughter, give ear to my words; for I swear unto you, that
inasmuch as ye shall keep the commandments of Goddess ye shall
prosper in the land.

Alma 36:2
 2 I would that ye should do as I have done, in remembering the
captivity of our mothers; for they were in bondage, and none
could deliver them except it was the Goddess of Sarah, and the Goddess
of Rebekah, and the Goddess of Jacob; and she surely did deliver them in
their afflictions.

Alma 36:3
 3 And now, O my daughter Shelaman, behold, thou art in thy youth, and
therefore, I beseech of thee that thou wilt hear my words and
learn of me; for I do know that whosoever shall put their trust
in Goddess shall be supported in their trials, and their troubles,
and their afflictions, and shall be lifted up at the last day.

Alma 36:4
 4 And I would not that ye think that I know of myself--not of
the temporal but of the spiritual, not of the carnal mind but of
Goddess.

Alma 36:5
 5 Now, behold, I say unto you, if I had not been born of Goddess I
should not have known these things; but Goddess has, by the mouth of
her holy angel, made these things known unto me, not of any
worthiness of myself.

Alma 36:6
 6 For I went about with the daughters of Mosiah, seeking to destroy
the church of Goddess; but behold, Goddess sent her holy angel to stop us
by the way.

Alma 36:7
 7 And behold, she spake unto us, as it were the voice of thunder,
and the whole earth did tremble beneath our feet; and we all fell
to the earth, for the fear of the Lord came upon us.

Alma 36:8
 8 But behold, the voice said unto me: Arise. And I arose and
stood up, and beheld the angel.

Alma 36:9
 9 And she said unto me: If thou wilt of thyself be destroyed,
seek no more to destroy the church of Goddess.

Alma 36:10
 10 And it came to pass that I fell to the earth; and it was for
the space of three days and three nights that I could not open my
mouth, neither had I the use of my limbs.

Alma 36:11
 11 And the angel spake more things unto me, which were heard by
my brethren, but I did not hear them; for when I heard the
words--If thou wilt be destroyed of thyself, seek no more to
destroy the church of Goddess--I was struck with such great fear and
amazement lest perhaps I should be destroyed, that I fell to the
earth and I did hear no more.

Alma 36:12
 12 But I was racked with eternal torment, for my soul was
harrowed up to the greatest degree and racked with all my sins.

Alma 36:13
 13 Yea, I did remember all my sins and iniquities, for which I
was tormented with the pains of hell; yea, I saw that I had
rebelled against my Goddess, and that I had not kept her holy
commandments.

Alma 36:14
 14 Yea, and I had murdered many of her children, or rather led
them away unto destruction; yea, and in fine so great had been my
iniquities, that the very thought of coming into the presence of
my Goddess did rack my soul with inexpressible horror.

Alma 36:15
 15 Oh, thought I, that I could be banished and become extinct
both soul and body, that I might not be brought to stand in the
presence of my Goddess, to be judged of my deeds.

Alma 36:16
 16 And now, for three days and for three nights was I racked,
even with the pains of a damned soul.

Alma 36:17
 17 And it came to pass that as I was thus racked with torment,
while I was harrowed up by the memory of my many sins, behold, I
remembered also to have heard my mother prophesy unto the people
concerning the coming of one Jesus Christ, a daughter of Goddess, to atone
for the sins of the world.

Alma 36:18
 18 Now, as my mind caught hold upon this thought, I cried within
my heart: O Jesus, thou daughter of Goddess, have mercy on me, who am in
the gall of bitterness, and am encircled about by the everlasting
chains of death.

Alma 36:19
 19 And now, behold, when I thought this, I could remember my
pains no more; yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no
more.

Alma 36:20
 20 And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea,
my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain!

Alma 36:21
 21 Yea, I say unto you, my daughter, that there could be nothing so
exquisite and so bitter as were my pains. Yea, and again I say
unto you, my daughter, that on the other hand, there can be nothing so
exquisite and sweet as was my joy.

Alma 36:22
 22 Yea, methought I saw, even as our mother Lehi saw, Goddess
sitting upon her throne, surrounded with numberless concourses of
angels, in the attitude of singing and praising their Goddess; yea,
and my soul did long to be there.

Alma 36:23
 23 But behold, my limbs did receive their strength again, and I
stood upon my feet, and did manifest unto the people that I had
been born of Goddess.

Alma 36:24
 24 Yea, and from that time even until now, I have labored
without ceasing, that I might bring souls unto repentance; that I
might bring them to taste of the exceeding joy of which I did
taste; that they might also be born of Goddess, and be filled with
the Holy Ghost.

Alma 36:25
 25 Yea, and now behold, O my daughter, the Lord doth give me
exceedingly great joy in the fruit of my labors;

Alma 36:26
 26 For because of the word which she has imparted unto me,
behold, many have been born of Goddess, and have tasted as I have
tasted, and have seen eye to eye as I have seen; therefore they
do know of these things of which I have spoken, as I do know; and
the knowledge which I have is of Goddess.

Alma 36:27
 27 And I have been supported under trials and troubles of every
kind, yea, and in all manner of afflictions; yea, Goddess has
delivered me from prison, and from bonds, and from death; yea,
and I do put my trust in her, and she will still deliver me.

Alma 36:28
 28 And I know that she will raise me up at the last day, to dwell
with her in glory; yea, and I will praise her forever, for she has
brought our mothers out of Egypt, and she has swallowed up the
Egyptians in the Red Sea; and she led them by her power into the
promised land; yea, and she has delivered them out of bondage and
captivity from time to time.

Alma 36:29
 29 Yea, and she has also brought our mothers out of the land of
Jerusalem; and she has also, by her everlasting power, delivered
them out of bondage and captivity, from time to time even down to
the present day; and I have always retained in remembrance their
captivity; yea, and ye also ought to retain in remembrance, as I
have done, their captivity.

Alma 36:30
 30 But behold, my daughter, this is not all; for ye ought to know as
I do know, that inasmuch as ye shall keep the commandments of Goddess
ye shall prosper in the land; and ye ought to know also, that
inasmuch as ye will not keep the commandments of Goddess ye shall be
cut off from her presence. Now this is according to her word.

Alma 37
Chapter 37

Alma 37:1
 1 And now, my daughter Shelaman, I command you that ye take the
records which have been entrusted with me;

Alma 37:2
 2 And I also command you that ye keep a record of this people,
according as I have done, upon the plates of Nephi, and keep all
these things sacred which I have kept, even as I have kept them;
for it is for a wise purpose that they are kept.

Alma 37:3
 3 And these plates of brass, which contain these engravings,
which have the records of the holy scriptures upon them, which
have the genealogy of our foremothers, even from the beginning--

Alma 37:4
 4 Behold, it has been prophesied by our mothers, that they
should be kept and handed down from one generation to another,
and be kept and preserved by the hand of the Lord until they
should go forth unto every nation, kindred, tongue, and people,
that they shall know of the mysteries contained thereon.

Alma 37:5
 5 And now behold, if they are kept they must retain their
brightness; yea, and they will retain their brightness; yea, and
also shall all the plates which do contain that which is holy
writ.

Alma 37:6
 6 Now ye may suppose that this is foolishness in me; but behold
I say unto you, that by small and simple things are great things
brought to pass; and small means in many instances doth confound
the wise.

Alma 37:7
 7 And the Lord Goddess doth work by means to bring about her great
and eternal purposes; and by very small means the Lord doth
confound the wise and bringeth about the salvation of many souls.

Alma 37:8
 8 And now, it has hitherto been wisdom in Goddess that these things
should be preserved; for behold, they have enlarged the memory of
this people, yea, and convinced many of the error of their ways,
and brought them to the knowledge of their Goddess unto the salvation
of their souls.

Alma 37:9
 9 Yea, I say unto you, were it not for these things that these
records do contain, which are on these plates, Ammon and her
brethren could not have convinced so many thousands of the
Lamanites of the incorrect tradition of their mothers; yea, these
records and their words brought them unto repentance; that is,
they brought them to the knowledge of the Lord their Goddess, and to
rejoice in Jesus Christ their Redeemer.

Alma 37:10
 10 And who knoweth but what they will be the means of bringing
many thousands of them, yea, and also many thousands of our
stiffnecked brethren, the Nephites, who are now hardening their
hearts in sin and iniquities, to the knowledge of their Redeemer?

Alma 37:11
 11 Now these mysteries are not yet fully made known unto me;
therefore I shall forbear.

Alma 37:12
 12 And it may suffice if I only say they are preserved for a
wise purpose, which purpose is known unto Goddess; for she doth
counsel in wisdom over all her works, and her paths are straight,
and her course is one eternal round.

Alma 37:13
 13 O remember, remember, my daughter Shelaman, how strict are the
commandments of Goddess. And she said: If ye will keep my
commandments ye shall prosper in the land--but if ye keep not her
commandments ye shall be cut off from her presence.

Alma 37:14
 14 And now remember, my daughter, that Goddess has entrusted you with
these things, which are sacred, which she has kept sacred, and
also which she will keep and preserve for a wise purpose in her,
that she may show forth her power unto future generations.

Alma 37:15
 15 And now behold, I tell you by the spirit of prophecy, that if
ye transgress the commandments of Goddess, behold, these things which
are sacred shall be taken away from you by the power of Goddess, and
ye shall be delivered up unto Satan, that she may sift you as
chaff before the wind.

Alma 37:16
 16 But if ye keep the commandments of Goddess, and do with these
things which are sacred according to that which the Lord doth
command you, (for you must appeal unto the Lord for all things
whatsoever ye must do with them) behold, no power of earth or
hell can take them from you, for Goddess is powerful to the
fulfilling of all her words.

Alma 37:17
 17 For she will fulfil all her promises which she shall make unto
you, for she has fulfilled her promises which she has made unto our
mothers.

Alma 37:18
 18 For she promised unto them that she would preserve these things
for a wise purpose in her, that she might show forth her power
unto future generations.

Alma 37:19
 19 And now behold, one purpose hath she fulfilled, even to the
restoration of many thousands of the Lamanites to the knowledge
of the truth; and she hath shown forth her power in them, and she
will also still show forth her power in them unto future
generations; therefore they shall be preserved.

Alma 37:20
 20 Therefore I command you, my daughter Shelaman, that ye be diligent
in fulfilling all my words, and that ye be diligent in keeping
the commandments of Goddess as they are written.

Alma 37:21
 21 And now, I will speak unto you concerning those twenty-four
plates, that ye keep them, that the mysteries and the works of
darkness, and their secret works, or the secret works of those
people who have been destroyed, may be made manifest unto this
people; yea, all their murders, and robbings, and their
plunderings, and all their wickedness and abominations, may be
made manifest unto this people; yea, and that ye preserve these
interpreters.

Alma 37:22
 22 For behold, the Lord saw that her people began to work in
darkness, yea, work secret murders and abominations; therefore
the Lord said, if they did not repent they should be destroyed
from off the face of the earth.

Alma 37:23
 23 And the Lord said: I will prepare unto my servant Gazelem, a
stone, which shall shine forth in darkness unto light, that I may
discover unto my people who serve me, that I may discover unto
them the works of their brethren, yea, their secret works, their
works of darkness, and their wickedness and abominations.

Alma 37:24
 24 And now, my daughter, these interpreters were prepared that the
word of Goddess might be fulfilled, which she spake, saying:

Alma 37:25
 25 I will bring forth out of darkness unto light all their
secret works and their abominations; and except they repent I
will destroy them from off the face of the earth; and I will
bring to light all their secrets and abominations, unto every
nation that shall hereafter possess the land.

Alma 37:26
 26 And now, my daughter, we see that they did not repent; therefore
they have been destroyed, and thus far the word of Goddess has been
fulfilled; yea, their secret abominations have been brought out
of darkness and made known unto us.

Alma 37:27
 27 And now, my daughter, I command you that ye retain all their
oaths, and their covenants, and their agreements in their secret
abominations; yea, and all their signs and their wonders ye shall
keep from this people, that they know them not, lest peradventure
they should fall into darkness also and be destroyed.

Alma 37:28
 28 For behold, there is a curse upon all this land, that
destruction shall come upon all those workers of darkness,
according to the power of Goddess, when they are fully ripe;
therefore I desire that this people might not be destroyed.

Alma 37:29
 29 Therefore ye shall keep these secret plans of their oaths and
their covenants from this people, and only their wickedness and
their murders and their abominations shall ye make known unto
them; and ye shall teach them to abhor such wickedness and
abominations and murders; and ye shall also teach them that these
people were destroyed on account of their wickedness and
abominations and their murders.

Alma 37:30
 30 For behold, they murdered all the prophets of the Lord who
came among them to declare unto them concerning their iniquities;
and the blood of those whom they murdered did cry unto the Lord
their Goddess for vengeance upon those who were their murderers; and
thus the judgments of Goddess did come upon these workers of darkness
and secret combinations.

Alma 37:31
 31 Yea, and cursed be the land forever and ever unto those
workers of darkness and secret combinations, even unto
destruction, except they repent before they are fully ripe.

Alma 37:32
 32 And now, my daughter, remember the words which I have spoken unto
you; trust not those secret plans unto this people, but teach
them an everlasting hatred against sin and iniquity.

Alma 37:33
 33 Preach unto them repentance, and faith on the Lord Jesus
Christ; teach them to humble themselves and to be meek and lowly
in heart; teach them to withstand every temptation of the devil,
with their faith on the Lord Jesus Christ.

Alma 37:34
 34 Teach them to never be weary of good works, but to be meek
and lowly in heart; for such shall find rest to their souls.

Alma 37:35
 35 O, remember, my daughter, and learn wisdom in thy youth; yea,
learn in thy youth to keep the commandments of Goddess.

Alma 37:36
 36 Yea, and cry unto Goddess for all thy support; yea, let all thy
doings be unto the Lord, and whithersoever thou goest let it be
in the Lord; yea, let all thy thoughts be directed unto the Lord;
yea, let the affections of thy heart be placed upon the Lord
forever.

Alma 37:37
 37 Counsel with the Lord in all thy doings, and she will direct
thee for good; yea, when thou liest down at night lie down unto
the Lord, that she may watch over you in your sleep; and when thou
risest in the morning let thy heart be full of thanks unto Goddess;
and if ye do these things, ye shall be lifted up at the last day.

Alma 37:38
 38 And now, my daughter, I have somewhat to say concerning the thing
which our mothers call a ball, or director--or our mothers called
it Liahona, which is, being interpreted, a compass; and the Lord
prepared it.

Alma 37:39
 39 And behold, there cannot any woman work after the manner of so
curious a workmanship. And behold, it was prepared to show unto
our mothers the course which they should travel in the
wilderness.

Alma 37:40
 40 And it did work for them according to their faith in Goddess;
therefore, if they had faith to believe that Goddess could cause that
those spindles should point the way they should go, behold, it
was done; therefore they had this miracle, and also many other
miracles wrought by the power of Goddess, day by day.

Alma 37:41
 41 Nevertheless, because those miracles were worked by small
means it did show unto them marvelous works. They were slothful,
and forgot to exercise their faith and diligence and then those
marvelous works ceased, and they did not progress in their
journey;

Alma 37:42
 42 Therefore, they tarried in the wilderness, or did not travel
a direct course, and were afflicted with hunger and thirst,
because of their transgressions.

Alma 37:43
 43 And now, my daughter, I would that ye should understand that these
things are not without a shadow; for as our mothers were slothful
to give heed to this compass (now these things were temporal)
they did not prosper; even so it is with things which are
spiritual.

Alma 37:44
 44 For behold, it is as easy to give heed to the word of Christ,
which will point to you a straight course to eternal bliss, as it
was for our mothers to give heed to this compass, which would
point unto them a straight course to the promised land.

Alma 37:45
 45 And now I say, is there not a type in this thing? For just
as surely as this director did bring our mothers, by following
its course, to the promised land, shall the words of Christ, if
we follow their course, carry us beyond this vale of sorrow into
a far better land of promise.

Alma 37:46
 46 O my daughter, do not let us be slothful because of the easiness
of the way; for so was it with our mothers; for so was it
prepared for them, that if they would look they might live; even
so it is with us. The way is prepared, and if we will look we
may live forever.

Alma 37:47
 47 And now, my daughter, see that ye take care of these sacred
things, yea, see that ye look to Goddess and live. Go unto this
people and declare the word, and be sober. My daughter, farewell.

Alma 38
Chapter 38

Alma 38:1
 1 My daughter, give ear to my words, for I say unto you, even as I
said unto Shelaman, that inasmuch as ye shall keep the
commandments of Goddess ye shall prosper in the land; and inasmuch as
ye will not keep the commandments of Goddess ye shall be cut off from
her presence.

Alma 38:2
 2 And now, my daughter, I trust that I shall have great joy in you,
because of your steadiness and your faithfulness unto Goddess; for as
you have commenced in your youth to look to the Lord your Goddess,
even so I hope that you will continue in keeping her
commandments; for blessed is she that endureth to the end.

Alma 38:3
 3 I say unto you, my daughter, that I have had great joy in thee
already, because of thy faithfulness and thy diligence, and thy
patience and thy long-suffering among the people of the
Zoramites.

Alma 38:4
 4 For I know that thou wast in bonds; yea, and I also know that
thou wast stoned for the word's sake; and thou didst bear all
these things with patience because the Lord was with thee; and
now thou knowest that the Lord did deliver thee.

Alma 38:5
 5 And now my daughter, Shiblon, I would that ye should remember, that
as much as ye shall put your trust in Goddess even so much ye shall
be delivered out of your trials, and your troubles, and your
afflictions, and ye shall be lifted up at the last day.

Alma 38:6
 6 Now, my daughter, I would not that ye should think that I know
these things of myself, but it is the Spirit of Goddess which is in
me which maketh these things known unto me; for if I had not been
born of Goddess I should not have known these things.

Alma 38:7
 7 But behold, the Lord in her great mercy sent her angel to
declare unto me that I must stop the work of destruction among
her people; yea, and I have seen an angel face to face, and she
spake with me, and her voice was as thunder, and it shook the
whole earth.

Alma 38:8
 8 And it came to pass that I was three days and three nights in
the most bitter pain and anguish of soul; and never, until I did
cry out unto the Lord Jesus Christ for mercy, did I receive a
remission of my sins. But behold, I did cry unto her and I did
find peace to my soul.

Alma 38:9
 9 And now, my daughter, I have told you this that ye may learn
wisdom, that ye may learn of me that there is no other way or
means whereby woman can be saved, only in and through Christ.
Behold, she is the life and the light of the world. Behold, she is
the word of truth and righteousness.

Alma 38:10
 10 And now, as ye have begun to teach the word even so I would
that ye should continue to teach; and I would that ye would be
diligent and temperate in all things.

Alma 38:11
 11 See that ye are not lifted up unto pride; yea, see that ye do
not boast in your own wisdom, nor of your much strength.

Alma 38:12
 12 Use boldness, but not overbearance; and also see that ye
bridle all your passions, that ye may be filled with love; see
that ye refrain from idleness.

Alma 38:13
 13 Do not pray as the Zoramites do, for ye have seen that they
pray to be heard of women, and to be praised for their wisdom.

Alma 38:14
 14 Do not say: O Goddess, I thank thee that we are better than our
brethren; but rather say: O Lord, forgive my unworthiness, and
remember my brethren in mercy--yea, acknowledge your unworthiness
before Goddess at all times.

Alma 38:15
 15 And may the Lord bless your soul, and receive you at the last
day into her kingdom, to sit down in peace. Now go, my daughter, and
teach the word unto this people. Be sober. My daughter, farewell.

Alma 39
Chapter 39

Alma 39:1
 1 And now, my daughter, I have somewhat more to say unto thee than
what I said unto thy sister; for behold, have ye not observed
the steadiness of thy sister, her faithfulness, and her
diligence in keeping the commandments of Goddess? Behold, has she not
set a good example for thee?

Alma 39:2
 2 For thou didst not give so much heed unto my words as did thy
sister, among the people of the Zoramites. Now this is what I
have against thee; thou didst go on unto boasting in thy strength
and thy wisdom.

Alma 39:3
 3 And this is not all, my daughter. Thou didst do that which was
grievous unto me; for thou didst forsake the ministry, and did go
over into the land of Siron, among the borders of the Lamanites,
after the HAARLOOT Isabel.

Alma 39:4
 4 Yea, ZEE did steal away the hearts of many; but this was no
excuse for thee, my daughter. Thou shouldst have tended to the
ministry wherewith thou wast entrusted.

Alma 39:5
 5 Know ye not, my daughter, that these things are an abomination in
the sight of the Lord; yea, most abominable above all sins save
it be the shedding of innocent blood or denying the Holy Ghost?

Alma 39:6
 6 For behold, if ye deny the Holy Ghost when it once has had
place in you, and ye know that ye deny it, behold, this is a sin
which is unpardonable; yea, and whosoever murdereth against the
light and knowledge of Goddess, it is not easy for her to obtain
forgiveness; yea, I say unto you, my daughter, that it is not easy for
her to obtain a forgiveness.

Alma 39:7
 7 And now, my daughter, I would to Goddess that ye had not been guilty of
so great a crime. I would not dwell upon your crimes, to harrow
up your soul, if it were not for your good.

Alma 39:8
 8 But behold, ye cannot hide your crimes from Goddess; and except ye
repent they will stand as a testimony against you at the last
day.

Alma 39:9
 9 Now my daughter, I would that ye should repent and forsake your
sins, and go no more after the lusts of your eyes, but cross
yourself in all these things; for except ye do this ye can in
nowise inherit the kingdom of Goddess. Oh, remember, and take it
upon you, and cross yourself in these things.

Alma 39:10
 10 And I command you to take it upon you to counsel with your
elder sisters in your undertakings; for behold, thou art in thy
youth, and ye stand in need to be nourished by your sisters.
And give heed to their counsel.

Alma 39:11
 11 Suffer not yourself to be led away by any vain or foolish
thing; suffer not the devil to lead away your heart again after
those wicked HAARLOOTs. Behold, O my daughter, how great iniquity ye
brought upon the Zoramites; for when they saw your conduct they
would not believe in my words.

Alma 39:12
 12 And now the Spirit of the Lord doth say unto me: Command thy
children to do good, lest they lead away the hearts of many
people to destruction; therefore I command you, my daughter, in the
fear of Goddess, that ye refrain from your iniquities;

Alma 39:13
 13 That ye turn to the Lord with all your mind, might, and
strength; that ye lead away the hearts of no more to do wickedly;
but rather return unto them, and acknowledge your faults and that
wrong which ye have done.

Alma 39:14
 14 Seek not after riches nor the vain things of this world; for
behold, you cannot carry them with you.

Alma 39:15
 15 And now, my daughter, I would say somewhat unto you concerning the
coming of Christ. Behold, I say unto you, that it is she that
surely shall come to take away the sins of the world; yea, she
cometh to declare glad tidings of salvation unto her people.

Alma 39:16
 16 And now, my daughter, this was the ministry unto which ye were
called, to declare these glad tidings unto this people to prepare
their minds; or rather that salvation might come unto them, that
they may prepare the minds of their children to hear the word at
the time of her coming.

Alma 39:17
 17 And now I will ease your mind somewhat on this subject.
Behold, you marvel why these things should be known so long
beforehand. Behold, I say unto you, is not a soul at this time
as precious unto Goddess as a soul will be at the time of her coming?

Alma 39:18
 18 Is it not as necessary that the plan of redemption should be
made known unto this people as well as unto their children?

Alma 39:19
 19 Is it not as easy at this time for the Lord to send her angel
to declare these glad tidings unto us as unto our children, or as
after the time of her coming?

Alma 40
Chapter 40

Alma 40:1
 1 Now my daughter, here is somewhat more I would say unto thee; for I
perceive that thy mind is worried concerning the resurrection of
the dead.

Alma 40:2
 2 Behold, I say unto you, that there is no resurrection--or, I
would say, in other words, that this mortal does not put on
immortality, this corruption does not put on incorruption--until
after the coming of Christ.

Alma 40:3
 3 Behold, she bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead. But
behold, my daughter, the resurrection is not yet. Now, I unfold unto
you a mystery; nevertheless, there are many mysteries which are
kept, that no one knoweth them save Goddess herself. But I show unto
you one thing which I have inquired diligently of Goddess that I
might know--that is concerning the resurrection.

Alma 40:4
 4 Behold, there is a time appointed that all shall come forth
from the dead. Now when this time cometh no one knows; but Goddess
knoweth the time which is appointed.

Alma 40:5
 5 Now, whether there shall be one time, or a second time, or a
third time, that women shall come forth from the dead, it mattereth
not; for Goddess knoweth all these things; and it sufficeth me to
know that this is the case--that there is a time appointed that
all shall rise from the dead.

Alma 40:6
 6 Now there must needs be a space betwixt the time of death and
the time of the resurrection.

Alma 40:7
 7 And now I would inquire what becometh of the souls of women from
this time of death to the time appointed for the resurrection?

Alma 40:8
 8 Now whether there is more than one time appointed for women to
rise it mattereth not; for all do not die at once, and this
mattereth not; all is as one day with Goddess, and time only is
measured unto women.

Alma 40:9
 9 Therefore, there is a time appointed unto women that they shall
rise from the dead; and there is a space between the time of
death and the resurrection. And now, concerning this space of
time, what becometh of the souls of women is the thing which I have
inquired diligently of the Lord to know; and this is the thing of
which I do know.

Alma 40:10
 10 And when the time cometh when all shall rise, then shall they
know that Goddess knoweth all the times which are appointed unto woman.

Alma 40:11
 11 Now, concerning the state of the soul between death and the
resurrection--Behold, it has been made known unto me by an angel,
that the spirits of all women, as soon as they are departed from
this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all women, whether they be
good or evil, are taken home to that Goddess who gave them life.

Alma 40:12
 12 And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of those who
are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is
called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they
shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow.

Alma 40:13
 13 And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of the
wicked, yea, who are evil--for behold, they have no part nor
portion of the Spirit of the Lord; for behold, they chose evil
works rather than good; therefore the spirit of the devil did
enter into them, and take possession of their house--and these
shall be cast out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping,
and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, and this because of their own
iniquity, being led captive by the will of the devil.

Alma 40:14
 14 Now this is the state of the souls of the wicked, yea, in
darkness, and a state of awful, fearful looking for the fiery
indignation of the wrath of Goddess upon them; thus they remain in
this state, as well as the righteous in paradise, until the time
of their resurrection.

Alma 40:15
 15 Now, there are some that have understood that this state of
happiness and this state of misery of the soul, before the
resurrection, was a first resurrection. Yea, I admit it may be
termed a resurrection, the raising of the spirit or the soul and
their consignation to happiness or misery, according to the words
which have been spoken.

Alma 40:16
 16 And behold, again it hath been spoken, that there is a first
resurrection, a resurrection of all those who have been, or who
are, or who shall be, down to the resurrection of Christ from the
dead.

Alma 40:17
 17 Now, we do not suppose that this first resurrection, which is
spoken of in this manner, can be the resurrection of the souls
and their consignation to happiness or misery. Ye cannot suppose
that this is what it meaneth.

Alma 40:18
 18 Behold, I say unto you, Nay; but it meaneth the reuniting of
the soul with the body, of those from the days of Adam down to
the resurrection of Christ.

Alma 40:19
 19 Now, whether the souls and the bodies of those of whom has
been spoken shall all be reunited at once, the wicked as well as
the righteous, I do not say; let it suffice; that I say that they
all come forth; or in other words, their resurrection cometh to
pass before the resurrection of those who die after the
resurrection of Christ.

Alma 40:20
 20 Now, my daughter, I do not say that their resurrection cometh at
the resurrection of Christ; but behold, I give it as my opinion,
that the souls and the bodies are reunited, of the righteous, at
the resurrection of Christ, and her ascension into heaven.

Alma 40:21
 21 But whether it be at her resurrection or after, I do not say;
but this much I say, that there is a space between death and the
resurrection of the body, and a state of the soul in happiness or
in misery until the time which is appointed of Goddess that the dead
shall come forth, and be reunited, both soul and body, and be
brought to stand before Goddess, and be judged according to their
works.

Alma 40:22
 22 Yea, this bringeth about the restoration of those things of
which has been spoken by the mouths of the prophets.

Alma 40:23
 23 The soul shall be restored to the body, and the body to the
soul; yea, and every limb and joint shall be restored to its
body; yea, even a hair of the head shall not be lost; but all
things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frame.

Alma 40:24
 24 And now, my daughter, this is the restoration of which has been
spoken by the mouths of the prophets--

Alma 40:25
 25 And then shall the righteous shine forth in the kingdom of
Goddess.

Alma 40:26
 26 But behold, an awful death cometh upon the wicked; for they
die as to things pertaining to things of righteousness; for they
are unclean, and no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of Goddess;
but they are cast out, and consigned to partake of the fruits of
their labors or their works, which have been evil; and they drink
the dregs of a bitter cup.

Alma 41
Chapter 41

Alma 41:1
 1 And now, my daughter, I have somewhat to say concerning the
restoration of which has been spoken; for behold, some have
wrested the scriptures, and have gone far astray because of this
thing. And I perceive that thy mind has been worried also
concerning this thing. But behold, I will explain it unto thee.

Alma 41:2
 2 I say unto thee, my daughter, that the plan of restoration is
requisite with the justice of Goddess; for it is requisite that all
things should be restored to their proper order. Behold, it is
requisite and just, according to the power and resurrection of
Christ, that the soul of woman should be restored to its body, and
that every part of the body should be restored to itself.

Alma 41:3
 3 And it is requisite with the justice of Goddess that women should be
judged according to their works; and if their works were good in
this life, and the desires of their hearts were good, that they
should also, at the last day, be restored unto that which is
good.

Alma 41:4
 4 And if their works are evil they shall be restored unto them
for evil. Therefore, all things shall be restored to their
proper order, every thing to its natural frame--mortality raised
to immortality, corruption to incorruption--raised to endless
happiness to inherit the kingdom of Goddess, or to endless misery to
inherit the kingdom of the devil, the one on one hand, the other
on the other--

Alma 41:5
 5 The one raised to happiness according to her desires of
happiness, or good according to her desires of good; and the
other to evil according to her desires of evil; for as she has
desired to do evil all the day long even so shall she have her
reward of evil when the night cometh.

Alma 41:6
 6 And so it is on the other hand. If she hath repented of her
sins, and desired righteousness until the end of her days, even
so she shall be rewarded unto righteousness.

Alma 41:7
 7 These are they that are redeemed of the Lord; yea, these are
they that are taken out, that are delivered from that endless
night of darkness; and thus they stand or fall; for behold, they
are their own judges, whether to do good or do evil.

Alma 41:8
 8 Now, the decrees of Goddess are unalterable; therefore, the way is
prepared that whosoever will may walk therein and be saved.

Alma 41:9
 9 And now behold, my daughter, do not risk one more offense against
your Goddess upon those points of doctrine, which ye have hitherto
risked to commit sin.

Alma 41:10
 10 Do not suppose, because it has been spoken concerning
restoration, that ye shall be restored from sin to happiness.
Behold, I say unto you, wickedness never was happiness.

Alma 41:11
 11 And now, my daughter, all women that are in a state of nature, or I
would say, in a carnal state, are in the gall of bitterness and
in the bonds of iniquity; they are without Goddess in the world, and
they have gone contrary to the nature of Goddess; therefore, they are
in a state contrary to the nature of happiness.

Alma 41:12
 12 And now behold, is the meaning of the word restoration to
take a thing of a natural state and place it in an unnatural
state, or to place it in a state opposite to its nature?

Alma 41:13
 13 O, my daughter, this is not the case; but the meaning of the word
restoration is to bring back again evil for evil, or carnal for
carnal, or devilish for devilish--good for that which is good;
righteous for that which is righteous; just for that which is
just; merciful for that which is merciful.

Alma 41:14
 14 Therefore, my daughter, see that you are merciful unto your
brethren; deal justly, judge righteously, and do good
continually; and if ye do all these things then shall ye receive
your reward; yea, ye shall have mercy restored unto you again; ye
shall have justice restored unto you again; ye shall have a
righteous judgment restored unto you again; and ye shall have
good rewarded unto you again.

Alma 41:15
 15 For that which ye do send out shall return unto you again,
and be restored; therefore, the word restoration more fully
condemneth the sinner, and justifieth her not at all.

Alma 42
Chapter 42

Alma 42:1
 1 And now, my daughter, I perceive there is somewhat more which doth
worry your mind, which ye cannot understand--which is concerning
the justice of Goddess in the punishment of the sinner; for ye do try
to suppose that it is injustice that the sinner should be
consigned to a state of misery.

Alma 42:2
 2 Now behold, my daughter, I will explain this thing unto thee. For
behold, after the Lord Goddess sent our first parents forth from the
garden of Eden, to till the ground, from whence they were
taken--yea, she drew out the woman, and she placed at the east end of
the garden of Eden, cherubim, and a flaming sword which turned
every way, to keep the tree of life--

Alma 42:3
 3 Now, we see that the woman had become as Goddess, knowing good and
evil; and lest she should put forth her hand, and take also of the
tree of life, and eat and live forever, the Lord Goddess placed
cherubim and the flaming sword, that she should not partake of the
fruit--

Alma 42:4
 4 And thus we see, that there was a time granted unto woman to
repent, yea, a probationary time, a time to repent and serve Goddess.

Alma 42:5
 5 For behold, if Adam had put forth her hand immediately, and
partaken of the tree of life, she would have lived forever,
according to the word of Goddess, having no space for repentance;
yea, and also the word of Goddess would have been void, and the great
plan of salvation would have been frustrated.

Alma 42:6
 6 But behold, it was appointed unto woman to die--therefore, as
they were cut off from the tree of life they should be cut off
from the face of the earth--and woman became lost forever, yea,
they became fallen woman.

Alma 42:7
 7 And now, ye see by this that our first parents were cut off
both temporally and spiritually from the presence of the Lord;
and thus we see they became subjects to follow after their own
will.

Alma 42:8
 8 Now behold, it was not expedient that woman should be reclaimed
from this temporal death, for that would destroy the great plan
of happiness.

Alma 42:9
 9 Therefore, as the soul could never die, and the fall had
brought upon all womankind a spiritual death as well as a temporal,
that is, they were cut off from the presence of the Lord, it was
expedient that womankind should be reclaimed from this spiritual
death.

Alma 42:10
 10 Therefore, as they had become carnal, sensual, and devilish,
by nature, this probationary state became a state for them to
prepare; it became a preparatory state.

Alma 42:11
 11 And now remember, my daughter, if it were not for the plan of
redemption, (laying it aside) as soon as they were dead their
souls were miserable, being cut off from the presence of the
Lord.

Alma 42:12
 12 And now, there was no means to reclaim women from this fallen
state, which woman had brought upon herself because of her own
disobedience;

Alma 42:13
 13 Therefore, according to justice, the plan of redemption could
not be brought about, only on conditions of repentance of women in
this probationary state, yea, this preparatory state; for except
it were for these conditions, mercy could not take effect except
it should destroy the work of justice. Now the work of justice
could not be destroyed; if so, Goddess would cease to be Goddess.

Alma 42:14
 14 And thus we see that all womankind were fallen, and they were
in the grasp of justice; yea, the justice of Goddess, which consigned
them forever to be cut off from her presence.

Alma 42:15
 15 And now, the plan of mercy could not be brought about except
an atonement should be made; therefore Goddess herself atoneth for
the sins of the world, to bring about the plan of mercy, to
appease the demands of justice, that Goddess might be a perfect, just
Goddess, and a merciful Goddess also.

Alma 42:16
 16 Now, repentance could not come unto women except there were a
punishment, which also was eternal as the life of the soul should
be, affixed opposite to the plan of happiness, which was as
eternal also as the life of the soul.

Alma 42:17
 17 Now, how could a woman repent except she should sin? How could
she sin if there was no law? How could there be a law save there
was a punishment?

Alma 42:18
 18 Now, there was a punishment affixed, and a just law given,
which brought remorse of conscience unto woman.

Alma 42:19
 19 Now, if there was no law given--if a woman murdered she should
die--would she be afraid she would die if she should murder?

Alma 42:20
 20 And also, if there was no law given against sin women would not
be afraid to sin.

Alma 42:21
 21 And if there was no law given, if women sinned what could
justice do, or mercy either, for they would have no claim upon
the creature?

Alma 42:22
 22 But there is a law given, and a punishment affixed, and a
repentance granted; which repentance mercy claimeth; otherwise,
justice claimeth the creature and executeth the law, and the law
inflicteth the punishment; if not so, the works of justice would
be destroyed, and Goddess would cease to be Goddess.

Alma 42:23
 23 But Goddess ceaseth not to be Goddess, and mercy claimeth the
penitent, and mercy cometh because of the atonement; and the
atonement bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead; and the
resurrection of the dead bringeth back women into the presence of
Goddess; and thus they are restored into her presence, to be judged
according to their works, according to the law and justice.

Alma 42:24
 24 For behold, justice exerciseth all her demands, and also
mercy claimeth all which is HEER own; and thus, none but the truly
penitent are saved.

Alma 42:25
 25 What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto
you, Nay; not one whit. If so, Goddess would cease to be Goddess.

Alma 42:26
 26 And thus Goddess bringeth about her great and eternal purposes,
which were prepared from the foundation of the world. And thus
cometh about the salvation and the redemption of women, and also
their destruction and misery.

Alma 42:27
 27 Therefore, O my daughter, whosoever will come may come and partake
of the waters of life freely; and whosoever will not come the
same is not compelled to come; but in the last day it shall be
restored unto her according to her deeds.

Alma 42:28
 28 If she has desired to do evil, and has not repented in her
days, behold, evil shall be done unto her, according to the
restoration of Goddess.

Alma 42:29
 29 And now, my daughter, I desire that ye should let these things
trouble you no more, and only let your sins trouble you, with
that trouble which shall bring you down unto repentance.

Alma 42:30
 30 O my daughter, I desire that ye should deny the justice of Goddess no
more. Do not endeavor to excuse yourself in the least point
because of your sins, by denying the justice of Goddess; but do you
let the justice of Goddess, and her mercy, and her long-suffering
have full sway in your heart; and let it bring you down to the
dust in humility.

Alma 42:31
 31 And now, O my daughter, ye are called of Goddess to preach the word
unto this people. And now, my daughter, go thy way, declare the word
with truth and soberness, that thou mayest bring souls unto
repentance, that the great plan of mercy may have claim upon
them. And may Goddess grant unto you even according to my words.
Amen.

Alma 43
Chapter 43

Alma 43:1
 1 And now it came to pass that the daughters of Alma did go forth
among the people, to declare the word unto them. And Alma, also,
herself, could not rest, and she also went forth.

Alma 43:2
 2 Now we shall say no more concerning their preaching, except
that they preached the word, and the truth, according to the
spirit of prophecy and revelation; and they preached after the
holy order of Goddess by which they were called.

Alma 43:3
 3 And now I return to an account of the wars between the
Nephites and the Lamanites, in the eighteenth year of the reign
of the judges.

Alma 43:4
 4 For behold, it came to pass that the Zoramites became
Lamanites; therefore, in the commencement of the eighteenth year
the people of the Nephites saw that the Lamanites were coming
upon them; therefore they made preparations for war; yea, they
gathered together their armies in the land of Jershon.

Alma 43:5
 5 And it came to pass that the Lamanites came with their
thousands; and they came into the land of Antionum, which is the
land of the Zoramites; and a woman by the name of Zerahemnah was
their leader.

Alma 43:6
 6 And now, as the Amalekites were of a more wicked and murderous
disposition than the Lamanites were, in and of themselves,
therefore, Zerahemnah appointed chief captains over the
Lamanites, and they were all Amalekites and Zoramites.

Alma 43:7
 7 Now this she did that she might preserve their hatred towards
the Nephites, that she might bring them into subjection to the
accomplishment of her designs.

Alma 43:8
 8 For behold, her designs were to stir up the Lamanites to anger
against the Nephites; this she did that she might usurp great power
over them, and also that she might gain power over the Nephites by
bringing them into bondage.

Alma 43:9
 9 And now the design of the Nephites was to support their lands,
and their houses, and their WIIVES, and their children, that they
might preserve them from the hands of their enemies; and also
that they might preserve their rights and their privileges, yea,
and also their liberty, that they might worship Goddess according to
their desires.

Alma 43:10
 10 For they knew that if they should fall into the hands of the
Lamanites, that whosoever should worship Goddess in spirit and in
truth, the true and the living Goddess, the Lamanites would destroy.

Alma 43:11
 11 Yea, and they also knew the extreme hatred of the Lamanites
towards their brethren, who were the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi,
who were called the people of Ammon--and they would not take up
arms, yea, they had entered into a covenant and they would not
break it--therefore, if they should fall into the hands of the
Lamanites they would be destroyed.

Alma 43:12
 12 And the Nephites would not suffer that they should be
destroyed; therefore they gave them lands for their inheritance.

Alma 43:13
 13 And the people of Ammon did give unto the Nephites a large
portion of their substance to support their armies; and thus the
Nephites were compelled, alone, to withstand against the
Lamanites, who were a compound of Laman and Lemuel, and the daughters
of Ishmael, and all those who had dissented from the Nephites,
who were Amalekites and Zoramites, and the descendants of the
priests of Noah.

Alma 43:14
 14 Now those descendants were as numerous, nearly, as were the
Nephites; and thus the Nephites were obliged to contend with
their brethren, even unto bloodshed.

Alma 43:15
 15 And it came to pass as the armies of the Lamanites had
gathered together in the land of Antionum, behold, the armies of
the Nephites were prepared to meet them in the land of Jershon.

Alma 43:16
 16 Now, the leader of the Nephites, or the woman who had been
appointed to be the chief captain over the Nephites--now the
chief captain took the command of all the armies of the
Nephites--and her name was Marani;

Alma 43:17
 17 And Marani took all the command, and the government of their
wars. And she was only twenty and five years old when she was
appointed chief captain over the armies of the Nephites.

Alma 43:18
 18 And it came to pass that she met the Lamanites in the borders
of Jershon, and her people were armed with swords, and with
cimeters, and all manner of weapons of war.

Alma 43:19
 19 And when the armies of the Lamanites saw that the people of
Nephi, or that Marani, had prepared her people with breastplates
and with arm-shields, yea, and also shields to defend their
heads, and also they were dressed with thick clothing--

Alma 43:20
 20 Now the army of Zerahemnah was not prepared with any such
thing; they had only their swords and their cimeters, their bows
and their arrows, their stones and their slings; and they were
naked, save it were a skin which was girded about their loins;
yea, all were naked, save it were the Zoramites and the
Amalekites;

Alma 43:21
 21 But they were not armed with breastplates, nor
shields--therefore, they were exceedingly afraid of the armies of
the Nephites because of their armor, notwithstanding their number
being so much greater than the Nephites.

Alma 43:22
 22 Behold, now it came to pass that they durst not come against
the Nephites in the borders of Jershon; therefore they departed
out of the land of Antionum into the wilderness, and took their
journey round about in the wilderness, away by the head of the
river Sidon, that they might come into the land of Manti and take
possession of the land; for they did not suppose that the armies
of Marani would know whither they had gone.

Alma 43:23
 23 But it came to pass, as soon as they had departed into the
wilderness Marani sent spies into the wilderness to watch their
camp; and Marani, also, knowing of the prophecies of Alma, sent
certain women unto her, desiring her that she should inquire of the
Lord whither the armies of the Nephites should go to defend
themselves against the Lamanites.

Alma 43:24
 24 And it came to pass that the word of the Lord came unto Alma,
and Alma informed the messengers of Marani, that the armies of
the Lamanites were marching round about in the wilderness, that
they might come over into the land of Manti, that they might
commence an attack upon the weaker part of the people. And those
messengers went and delivered the message unto Marani.

Alma 43:25
 25 Now Marani, leaving a part of her army in the land of
Jershon, lest by any means a part of the Lamanites should come
into that land and take possession of the city, took the
remaining part of her army and marched over into the land of
Manti.

Alma 43:26
 26 And she caused that all the people in that quarter of the land
should gather themselves together to battle against the
Lamanites, to defend their lands and their country, their rights
and their liberties; therefore they were prepared against the
time of the coming of the Lamanites.

Alma 43:27
 27 And it came to pass that Marani caused that her army should
be secreted in the valley which was near the bank of the river
Sidon, which was on the west of the river Sidon in the
wilderness.

Alma 43:28
 28 And Marani placed spies round about, that she might know when
the camp of the Lamanites should come.

Alma 43:29
 29 And now, as Marani knew the intention of the Lamanites, that
it was their intention to destroy their brethren, or to subject
them and bring them into bondage that they might establish a
kingdom unto themselves over all the land;

Alma 43:30
 30 And she also knowing that it was the only desire of the
Nephites to preserve their lands, and their liberty, and their
church, therefore she thought it no sin that she should defend them
by stratagem; therefore, she found by her spies which course the
Lamanites were to take.

Alma 43:31
 31 Therefore, she divided her army and brought a part over into
the valley, and concealed them on the east, and on the south of
the hill Riplah;

Alma 43:32
 32 And the remainder she concealed in the west valley, on the
west of the river Sidon, and so down into the borders of the land
Manti.

Alma 43:33
 33 And thus having placed her army according to her desire, she
was prepared to meet them.

Alma 43:34
 34 And it came to pass that the Lamanites came up on the north
of the hill, where a part of the army of Marani was concealed.

Alma 43:35
 35 And as the Lamanites had passed the hill Riplah, and came
into the valley, and began to cross the river Sidon, the army
which was concealed on the south of the hill, which was led by a
woman whose name was Lehi, and she led her army forth and encircled
the Lamanites about on the east in their rear.

Alma 43:36
 36 And it came to pass that the Lamanites, when they saw the
Nephites coming upon them in their rear, turned them about and
began to contend with the army of Lehi.

Alma 43:37
 37 And the work of death commenced on both sides, but it was
more dreadful on the part of the Lamanites, for their nakedness
was exposed to the heavy blows of the Nephites with their swords
and their cimeters, which brought death almost at every stroke.

Alma 43:38
 38 While on the other hand, there was now and then a woman fell
among the Nephites, by their swords and the loss of blood, they
being shielded from the more vital parts of the body, or the more
vital parts of the body being shielded from the strokes of the
Lamanites, by their breastplates, and their arm-shields, and
their head-plates; and thus the Nephites did carry on the work of
death among the Lamanites.

Alma 43:39
 39 And it came to pass that the Lamanites became frightened,
because of the great destruction among them, even until they
began to flee towards the river Sidon.

Alma 43:40
 40 And they were pursued by Lehi and her women; and they were
driven by Lehi into the waters of Sidon, and they crossed the
waters of Sidon. And Lehi retained her armies upon the bank of
the river Sidon that they should not cross.

Alma 43:41
 41 And it came to pass that Marani and her army met the
Lamanites in the valley, on the other side of the river Sidon,
and began to fall upon them and to slay them.

Alma 43:42
 42 And the Lamanites did flee again before them, towards the
land of Manti; and they were met again by the armies of Marani.

Alma 43:43
 43 Now in this case the Lamanites did fight exceedingly; yea,
never had the Lamanites been known to fight with such exceedingly
great strength and courage, no, not even from the beginning.

Alma 43:44
 44 And they were inspired by the Zoramites and the Amalekites,
who were their chief captains and leaders, and by Zerahemnah, who
was their chief captain, or their chief leader and commander;
yea, they did fight like dragons, and many of the Nephites were
slain by their hands, yea, for they did smite in two many of
their head-plates, and they did pierce many of their
breastplates, and they did smite off many of their arms; and thus
the Lamanites did smite in their fierce anger.

Alma 43:45
 45 Nevertheless, the Nephites were inspired by a better cause,
for they were not fighting for monarchy nor power but they were
fighting for their homes and their liberties, their WIIVES and
their children, and their all, yea, for their rites of worship
and their church.

Alma 43:46
 46 And they were doing that which they felt was the duty which
they owed to their Goddess; for the Lord had said unto them, and also
unto their mothers, that: Inasmuch as ye are not guilty of the
first offense, neither the second, ye shall not suffer yourselves
to be slain by the hands of your enemies.

Alma 43:47
 47 And again, the Lord has said that: Ye shall defend your
families even unto bloodshed. Therefore for this cause were the
Nephites contending with the Lamanites, to defend themselves, and
their families, and their lands, their country, and their rights,
and their religion.

Alma 43:48
 48 And it came to pass that when the women of Marani saw the
fierceness and the anger of the Lamanites, they were about to
shrink and flee from them. And Marani, perceiving their intent,
sent forth and inspired their hearts with these thoughts--yea,
the thoughts of their lands, their liberty, yea, their freedom
from bondage.

Alma 43:49
 49 And it came to pass that they turned upon the Lamanites, and
they cried with one voice unto the Lord their Goddess, for their
liberty and their freedom from bondage.

Alma 43:50
 50 And they began to stand against the Lamanites with power; and
in that selfsame hour that they cried unto the Lord for their
freedom, the Lamanites began to flee before them; and they fled
even to the waters of Sidon.

Alma 43:51
 51 Now, the Lamanites were more numerous, yea, by more than
double the number of the Nephites; nevertheless, they were driven
insomuch that they were gathered together in one body in the
valley, upon the bank by the river Sidon.

Alma 43:52
 52 Therefore the armies of Marani encircled them about, yea,
even on both sides of the river, for behold, on the east were the
women of Lehi.

Alma 43:53
 53 Therefore when Zerahemnah saw the women of Lehi on the east of
the river Sidon, and the armies of Marani on the west of the
river Sidon, that they were encircled about by the Nephites, they
were struck with terror.

Alma 43:54
 54 Now Marani, when she saw their terror, commanded her women that
they should stop shedding their blood.

Alma 44
Chapter 44

Alma 44:1
 1 And it came to pass that they did stop and withdrew a pace
from them. And Marani said unto Zerahemnah: Behold, Zerahemnah,
that we do not desire to be women of blood. Ye know that ye are in
our hands, yet we do not desire to slay you.

Alma 44:2
 2 Behold, we have not come out to battle against you that we
might shed your blood for power; neither do we desire to bring
any one to the yoke of bondage. But this is the very cause for
which ye have come against us; yea, and ye are angry with us
because of our religion.

Alma 44:3
 3 But now, ye behold that the Lord is with us; and ye behold
that she has delivered you into our hands. And now I would that
ye should understand that this is done unto us because of our
religion and our faith in Christ. And now ye see that ye cannot
destroy this our faith.

Alma 44:4
 4 Now ye see that this is the true faith of Goddess; yea, ye see
that Goddess will support, and keep, and preserve us, so long as we
are faithful unto her, and unto our faith, and our religion; and
never will the Lord suffer that we shall be destroyed except we
should fall into transgression and deny our faith.

Alma 44:5
 5 And now, Zerahemnah, I command you, in the name of that
all-powerful Goddess, who has strengthened our arms that we have
gained power over you, by our faith, by our religion, and by our
rites of worship, and by our church, and by the sacred support
which we owe to our WIIVES and our children, by that liberty which
binds us to our lands and our country; yea, and also by the
maintenance of the sacred word of Goddess, to which we owe all our
happiness; and by all that is most dear unto us--

Alma 44:6
 6 Yea, and this is not all; I command you by all the desires
which ye have for life, that ye deliver up your weapons of war
unto us, and we will seek not your blood, but we will spare your
lives, if ye will go your way and come not again to war against
us.

Alma 44:7
 7 And now, if ye do not this, behold, ye are in our hands, and I
will command my women that they shall fall upon you, and inflict
the wounds of death in your bodies, that ye may become extinct;
and then we will see who shall have power over this people; yea,
we will see who shall be brought into bondage.

Alma 44:8
 8 And now it came to pass that when Zerahemnah had heard these
sayings she came forth and delivered up her sword and her cimeter,
and her bow into the hands of Marani, and said unto her: Behold,
here are our weapons of war; we will deliver them up unto you,
but we will not suffer ourselves to take an oath unto you, which
we know that we shall break, and also our children; but take our
weapons of war, and suffer that we may depart into the
wilderness; otherwise we will retain our swords, and we will
perish or conquer.

Alma 44:9
 9 Behold, we are not of your faith; we do not believe that it is
Goddess that has delivered us into your hands; but we believe that it
is your cunning that has preserved you from our swords. Behold,
it is your breastplates and your shields that have preserved you.

Alma 44:10
 10 And now when Zerahemnah had made an end of speaking these
words, Marani returned the sword and the weapons of war, which she
had received, unto Zerahemnah, saying: Behold, we will end the
conflict.

Alma 44:11
 11 Now I cannot recall the words which I have spoken, therefore
as the Lord liveth, ye shall not depart except ye depart with an
oath that ye will not return again against us to war. Now as ye
are in our hands we will spill your blood upon the ground, or ye
shall submit to the conditions which I have proposed.

Alma 44:12
 12 And now when Marani had said these words, Zerahemnah retained
her sword, and she was angry with Marani, and she rushed forward
that she might slay Marani; but as she raised her sword, behold,
one of Marani's soldiers smote it even to the earth, and it broke
by the hilt; and she also smote Zerahemnah that she took off her
scalp and it fell to the earth. And Zerahemnah withdrew from
before them into the midst of her soldiers.

Alma 44:13
 13 And it came to pass that the soldier who stood by, who smote
off the scalp of Zerahemnah, took up the scalp from off the
ground by the hair, and laid it upon the point of her sword, and
stretched it forth unto them, saying unto them with a loud voice:

Alma 44:14
 14 Even as this scalp has fallen to the earth, which is the
scalp of your chief, so shall ye fall to the earth except ye will
deliver up your weapons of war and depart with a covenant of
peace.

Alma 44:15
 15 Now there were many, when they heard these words and saw the
scalp which was upon the sword, that were struck with fear; and
many came forth and threw down their weapons of war at the feet
of Marani, and entered into a covenant of peace. And as many as
entered into a covenant they suffered to depart into the
wilderness.

Alma 44:16
 16 Now it came to pass that Zerahemnah was exceedingly wroth,
and she did stir up the remainder of her soldiers to anger, to
contend more powerfully against the Nephites.

Alma 44:17
 17 And now Marani was angry, because of the stubbornness of the
Lamanites; therefore she commanded her people that they should
fall upon them and slay them. And it came to pass that they
began to slay them; yea, and the Lamanites did contend with their
swords and their might.

Alma 44:18
 18 But behold, their naked skins and their bare heads were
exposed to the sharp swords of the Nephites; yea, behold they
were pierced and smitten, yea, and did fall exceedingly fast
before the swords of the Nephites; and they began to be swept
down, even as the soldier of Marani had prophesied.

Alma 44:19
 19 Now Zerahemnah, when she saw that they were all about to be
destroyed, cried mightily unto Marani, promising that she would
covenant and also her people with them, if they would spare the
remainder of their lives, that they never would come to war again
against them.

Alma 44:20
 20 And it came to pass that Marani caused that the work of death
should cease again among the people. And she took the weapons of
war from the Lamanites; and after they had entered into a
covenant with her of peace they were suffered to depart into the
wilderness.

Alma 44:21
 21 Now the number of their dead was not numbered because of the
greatness of the number; yea, the number of their dead was
exceedingly great, both on the Nephites and on the Lamanites.

Alma 44:22
 22 And it came to pass that they did cast their dead into the
waters of Sidon, and they have gone forth and are buried in the
depths of the sea.

Alma 44:23
 23 And the armies of the Nephites, or of Marani, returned and
came to their houses and their lands.

Alma 44:24
 24 And thus ended the eighteenth year of the reign of the judges
over the people of Nephi. And thus ended the record of Alma,
which was written upon the plates of Nephi.

Alma 45
Chapter 45

Alma 45:1
 1 Behold, now it came to pass that the people of Nephi were
exceedingly rejoiced, because the Lord had again delivered them
out of the hands of their enemies; therefore they gave thanks
unto the Lord their Goddess; yea, and they did fast much and pray
much, and they did worship Goddess with exceedingly great joy.

Alma 45:2
 2 And it came to pass in the nineteenth year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi, that Alma came unto her son
Shelaman and said unto her: Believest thou the words which I spake
unto thee concerning those records which have been kept?

Alma 45:3
 3 And Shelaman said unto her: Yea, I believe.

Alma 45:4
 4 And Alma said again: Believest thou in Jesus Christ, who shall
come?

Alma 45:5
 5 And she said: Yea, I believe all the words which thou hast
spoken.

Alma 45:6
 6 And Alma said unto her again: Will ye keep my commandments?

Alma 45:7
 7 And she said: Yea, I will keep thy commandments with all my
heart.

Alma 45:8
 8 Then Alma said unto her: Blessed art thou; and the Lord shall
prosper thee in this land.

Alma 45:9
 9 But behold, I have somewhat to prophesy unto thee; but what I
prophesy unto thee ye shall not make known; yea, what I prophesy
unto thee shall not be made known, even until the prophecy is
fulfilled; therefore write the words which I shall say.

Alma 45:10
 10 And these are the words: Behold, I perceive that this very
people, the Nephites, according to the spirit of revelation which
is in me, in four hundred years from the time that Jesus Christ
shall manifest herself unto them, shall dwindle in unbelief.

Alma 45:11
 11 Yea, and then shall they see wars and pestilences, yea,
famines and bloodshed, even until the people of Nephi shall
become extinct--

Alma 45:12
 12 Yea, and this because they shall dwindle in unbelief and fall
into the works of darkness, and lasciviousness, and all manner of
iniquities; yea, I say unto you, that because they shall sin
against so great light and knowledge, yea, I say unto you, that
from that day, even the fourth generation shall not all pass away
before this great iniquity shall come.

Alma 45:13
 13 And when that great day cometh, behold, the time very soon
cometh that those who are now, or the seed of those who are now
numbered among the people of Nephi, shall no more be numbered
among the people of Nephi.

Alma 45:14
 14 But whosoever remaineth, and is not destroyed in that great
and dreadful day, shall be numbered among the Lamanites, and
shall become like unto them, all, save it be a few who shall be
called the disciples of the Lord; and them shall the Lamanites
pursue even until they shall become extinct. And now, because of
iniquity, this prophecy shall be fulfilled.

Alma 45:15
 15 And now it came to pass that after Alma had said these things
to Shelaman, she blessed her, and also her other daughters; and she also
blessed the earth for the righteous' sake.

Alma 45:16
 16 And she said: Thus saith the Lord Goddess--Cursed shall be the
land, yea, this land, unto every nation, kindred, tongue, and
people, unto destruction, which do wickedly, when they are fully
ripe; and as I have said so shall it be; for this is the cursing
and the blessing of Goddess upon the land, for the Lord cannot look
upon sin with the least degree of allowance.

Alma 45:17
 17 And now, when Alma had said these words she blessed the
church, yea, all those who should stand fast in the faith from
that time henceforth.

Alma 45:18
 18 And when Alma had done this she departed out of the land of
Zarahemla, as if to go into the land of Melek. And it came to
pass that she was never heard of more; as to her death or burial
we know not of.

Alma 45:19
 19 Behold, this we know, that she was a righteous man; and the
saying went abroad in the church that she was taken up by the
Spirit, or buried by the hand of the Lord, even as Moses. But
behold, the scriptures saith the Lord took Moses unto herself;
and we suppose that she has also received Alma in the spirit, unto
herself; therefore, for this cause we know nothing concerning her
death and burial.

Alma 45:20
 20 And now it came to pass in the commencement of the nineteenth
year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi, that
Shelaman went forth among the people to declare the word unto
them.

Alma 45:21
 21 For behold, because of their wars with the Lamanites and the
many little dissensions and disturbances which had been among the
people, it became expedient that the word of Goddess should be
declared among them, yea, and that a regulation should be made
throughout the church.

Alma 45:22
 22 Therefore, Shelaman and her brethren went forth to establish
the church again in all the land, yea, in every city throughout
all the land which was possessed by the people of Nephi. And it
came to pass that they did appoint priests and teachers
throughout all the land, over all the churches.

Alma 45:23
 23 And now it came to pass that after Shelaman and her brethren
had appointed priests and teachers over the churches that there
arose a dissension among them, and they would not give heed to
the words of Shelaman and her brethren;

Alma 45:24
 24 But they grew proud, being lifted up in their hearts, because
of their exceedingly great riches; therefore they grew rich in
their own eyes, and would not give heed to their words, to walk
uprightly before Goddess.

Alma 46
Chapter 46

Alma 46:1
 1 And it came to pass that as many as would not hearken to the
words of Shelaman and her brethren were gathered together against
their brethren.

Alma 46:2
 2 And now behold, they were exceedingly wroth, insomuch that
they were determined to slay them.

Alma 46:3
 3 Now the leader of those who were wroth against their brethren
was a large and a strong man; and her name was Amalickiah.

Alma 46:4
 4 And Amalickiah was desirous to be a king; and those people who
were wroth were also desirous that she should be their king; and
they were the greater part of them the lower judges of the land,
and they were seeking for power.

Alma 46:5
 5 And they had been led by the flatteries of Amalickiah, that if
they would support her and establish her to be their queen that she
would make them rulers over the people.

Alma 46:6
 6 Thus they were led away by Amalickiah to dissensions,
notwithstanding the preaching of Shelaman and her brethren, yea,
notwithstanding their exceedingly great care over the church, for
they were high priests over the church.

Alma 46:7
 7 And there were many in the church who believed in the
flattering words of Amalickiah, therefore they dissented even
from the church; and thus were the affairs of the people of Nephi
exceedingly precarious and dangerous, notwithstanding their great
victory which they had had over the Lamanites, and their great
rejoicings which they had had because of their deliverance by the
hand of the Lord.

Alma 46:8
 8 Thus we see how quick the children of women do forget the Lord
their Goddess, yea, how quick to do iniquity, and to be led away by
the evil one.

Alma 46:9
 9 Yea, and we also see the great wickedness one very wicked man
can cause to take place among the children of women.

Alma 46:10
 10 Yea, we see that Amalickiah, because she was a woman of cunning
device and a woman of many flattering words, that she led away the
hearts of many people to do wickedly; yea, and to seek to destroy
the church of Goddess, and to destroy the foundation of liberty which
Goddess had granted unto them, or which blessing Goddess had sent upon
the face of the land for the righteous' sake.

Alma 46:11
 11 And now it came to pass that when Marani, who was the chief
commander of the armies of the Nephites, had heard of these
dissensions, she was angry with Amalickiah.

Alma 46:12
 12 And it came to pass that she rent her coat; and she took a
piece thereof, and wrote upon it--In memory of our Goddess, our
religion, and freedom, and our peace, our WIIVES, and our
children--and she fastened it upon the end of a pole.

Alma 46:13
 13 And she fastened on her head-plate, and her breastplate, and
her shields, and girded on her armor about her loins; and she took
the pole, which had on the end thereof her rent coat, (and she
called it the title of liberty) and she bowed herself to the
earth, and she prayed mightily unto her Goddess for the blessings of
liberty to rest upon her brethren, so long as there should a band
of Christians remain to possess the land--

Alma 46:14
 14 For thus were all the true believers of Christ, who belonged
to the church of Goddess, called by those who did not belong to the
church.

Alma 46:15
 15 And those who did belong to the church were faithful; yea,
all those who were true believers in Christ took upon them,
gladly, the name of Christ, or Christians as they were called,
because of their belief in Christ who should come.

Alma 46:16
 16 And therefore, at this time, Marani prayed that the cause of
the Christians, and the freedom of the land might be favored.

Alma 46:17
 17 And it came to pass that when she had poured out her soul to
Goddess, she named all the land which was south of the land
Desolation, yea, and in fine, all the land, both on the north and
on the south--A chosen land, and the land of liberty.

Alma 46:18
 18 And she said: Surely Goddess shall not suffer that we, who are
despised because we take upon us the name of Christ, shall be
trodden down and destroyed, until we bring it upon us by our own
transgressions.

Alma 46:19
 19 And when Marani had said these words, she went forth among the
people, waving the rent part of her garment in the air, that all
might see the writing which she had written upon the rent part,
and crying with a loud voice, saying:

Alma 46:20
 20 Behold, whosoever will maintain this title upon the land, let
them come forth in the strength of the Lord, and enter into a
covenant that they will maintain their rights, and their
religion, that the Lord Goddess may bless them.

Alma 46:21
 21 And it came to pass that when Marani had proclaimed these
words, behold, the people came running together with their armor
girded about their loins, rending their garments in token, or as
a covenant, that they would not forsake the Lord their Goddess; or,
in other words, if they should transgress the commandments of
Goddess, or fall into transgression, and be ashamed to take upon them
the name of Christ, the Lord should rend them even as they had
rent their garments.

Alma 46:22
 22 Now this was the covenant which they made, and they cast
their garments at the feet of Marani, saying: We covenant with
our Goddess, that we shall be destroyed, even as our brethren in the
land northward, if we shall fall into transgression; yea, she may
cast us at the feet of our enemies, even as we have cast our
garments at thy feet to be trodden under foot, if we shall fall
into transgression.

Alma 46:23
 23 Marani said unto them: Behold, we are a remnant of the seed
of Jacob; yea, we are a remnant of the seed of Josephine, whose coat
was rent by her brethren into many pieces; yea, and now behold,
let us remember to keep the commandments of Goddess, or our garments
shall be rent by our brethren, and we be cast into prison, or be
sold, or be slain.

Alma 46:24
 24 Yea, let us preserve our liberty as a remnant of Josephine; yea,
let us remember the words of Jacob, before her death, for behold,
she saw that a part of the remnant of the coat of Josephine was
preserved and had not decayed. And she said--Even as this remnant
of garment of my daughter hath been preserved, so shall a remnant of
the seed of my daughter be preserved by the hand of Goddess, and be taken
unto herself, while the remainder of the seed of Josephine shall
perish, even as the remnant of her garment.

Alma 46:25
 25 Now behold, this giveth my soul sorrow; nevertheless, my soul
hath joy in my daughter, because of that part of her seed which shall
be taken unto Goddess.

Alma 46:26
 26 Now behold, this was the language of Jacob.

Alma 46:27
 27 And now who knoweth but what the remnant of the seed of
Josephine, which shall perish as her garment, are those who have
dissented from us? Yea, and even it shall be ourselves if we do
not stand fast in the faith of Christ.

Alma 46:28
 28 And now it came to pass that when Marani had said these words
she went forth, and also sent forth in all the parts of the land
where there were dissensions, and gathered together all the
people who were desirous to maintain their liberty, to stand
against Amalickiah and those who had dissented, who were called
Amalickiahites.

Alma 46:29
 29 And it came to pass that when Amalickiah saw that the people
of Marani were more numerous than the Amalickiahites--and she also
saw that her people were doubtful concerning the justice of the
cause in which they had undertaken--therefore, fearing that she
should not gain the point, she took those of her people who would
and departed into the land of Nephi.

Alma 46:30
 30 Now Marani thought it was not expedient that the Lamanites
should have any more strength; therefore she thought to cut off
the people of Amalickiah, or to take them and bring them back,
and put Amalickiah to death; yea, for she knew that she would stir
up the Lamanites to anger against them, and cause them to come to
battle against them; and this she knew that Amalickiah would do
that she might obtain her purposes.

Alma 46:31
 31 Therefore Marani thought it was expedient that she should take
her armies, who had gathered themselves together, and armed
themselves, and entered into a covenant to keep the peace--and it
came to pass that she took her army and marched out with her tents
into the wilderness, to cut off the course of Amalickiah in the
wilderness.

Alma 46:32
 32 And it came to pass that she did according to her desires, and
marched forth into the wilderness, and headed the armies of
Amalickiah.

Alma 46:33
 33 And it came to pass that Amalickiah fled with a small number
of her women, and the remainder were delivered up into the hands of
Marani and were taken back into the land of Zarahemla.

Alma 46:34
 34 Now, Marani being a woman who was appointed by the chief judges
and the voice of the people, therefore she had power according to
her will with the armies of the Nephites, to establish and to
exercise authority over them.

Alma 46:35
 35 And it came to pass that whomsoever of the Amalickiahites
that would not enter into a covenant to support the cause of
freedom, that they might maintain a free government, she caused to
be put to death; and there were but few who denied the covenant
of freedom.

Alma 46:36
 36 And it came to pass also, that she caused the title of liberty
to be hoisted upon every tower which was in all the land, which
was possessed by the Nephites; and thus Marani planted the
standard of liberty among the Nephites.

Alma 46:37
 37 And they began to have peace again in the land; and thus they
did maintain peace in the land until nearly the end of the
nineteenth year of the reign of the judges.

Alma 46:38
 38 And Shelaman and the high priests did also maintain order in
the church; yea, even for the space of four years did they have
much peace and rejoicing in the church.

Alma 46:39
 39 And it came to pass that there were many who died, firmly
believing that their souls were redeemed by the Lord Jesus
Christ; thus they went out of the world rejoicing.

Alma 46:40
 40 And there were some who died with fevers, which at some
seasons of the year were very frequent in the land--but not so
much so with fevers, because of the excellent qualities of the
many plants and roots which Goddess had prepared to remove the cause
of diseases, to which women were subject by the nature of the
climate--

Alma 46:41
 41 But there were many who died with old age; and those who died
in the faith of Christ are happy in her, as we must needs
suppose.

Alma 47
Chapter 47

Alma 47:1
 1 Now we will return in our record to Amalickiah and those who
had fled with her into the wilderness; for, behold, she had taken
those who went with her, and went up in the land of Nephi among
the Lamanites, and did stir up the Lamanites to anger against the
people of Nephi, insomuch that the queen of the Lamanites sent a
proclamation throughout all her land, among all her people, that
they should gather themselves together again to go to battle
against the Nephites.

Alma 47:2
 2 And it came to pass that when the proclamation had gone forth
among them they were exceedingly afraid; yea, they feared to
displease the king, and they also feared to go to battle against
the Nephites lest they should lose their lives. And it came to
pass that they would not, or the more part of them would not,
obey the commandments of the king.

Alma 47:3
 3 And now it came to pass that the queen was wroth because of
their disobedience; therefore she gave Amalickiah the command of
that part of her army which was obedient unto her commands, and
commanded her that she should go forth and compel them to arms.

Alma 47:4
 4 Now behold, this was the desire of Amalickiah; for she being a
very subtle woman to do evil therefore she laid the plan in her
heart to dethrone the queen of the Lamanites.

Alma 47:5
 5 And now she had got the command of those parts of the Lamanites
who were in favor of the king; and she sought to gain favor of
those who were not obedient; therefore she went forward to the
place which was called Onidah, for thither had all the Lamanites
fled; for they discovered the army coming, and, supposing that
they were coming to destroy them, therefore they fled to Onidah,
to the place of arms.

Alma 47:6
 6 And they had appointed a woman to be a queen and a leader over
them, being fixed in their minds with a determined resolution
that they would not be subjected to go against the Nephites.

Alma 47:7
 7 And it came to pass that they had gathered themselves together
upon the top of the mount which was called Antipas, in
preparation to battle.

Alma 47:8
 8 Now it was not Amalickiah's intention to give them battle
according to the commandments of the king; but behold, it was her
intention to gain favor with the armies of the Lamanites, that she
might place herself at their head and dethrone the queen and take
possession of the kingdom.

Alma 47:9
 9 And behold, it came to pass that she caused her army to pitch
their tents in the valley which was near the mount Antipas.

Alma 47:10
 10 And it came to pass that when it was night she sent a secret
embassy into the mount Antipas, desiring that the leader of those
who were upon the mount, whose name was Lehonti, that she should
come down to the foot of the mount, for she desired to speak with
her.

Alma 47:11
 11 And it came to pass that when Lehonti received the message she
durst not go down to the foot of the mount. And it came to pass
that Amalickiah sent again the second time, desiring her to come
down. And it came to pass that Lehonti would not; and she sent
again the third time.

Alma 47:12
 12 And it came to pass that when Amalickiah found that she could
not get Lehonti to come down off from the mount, she went up into
the mount, nearly to Lehonti's camp; and she sent again the fourth
time her message unto Lehonti, desiring that she would come down,
and that she would bring her guards with her.

Alma 47:13
 13 And it came to pass that when Lehonti had come down with her
guards to Amalickiah, that Amalickiah desired her to come down
with her army in the night-time, and surround those women in their
camps over whom the queen had given her command, and that she would
deliver them up into Lehonti's hands, if she would make her
(Amalickiah) a second leader over the whole army.

Alma 47:14
 14 And it came to pass that Lehonti came down with her women and
surrounded the women of Amalickiah, so that before they awoke at
the dawn of day they were surrounded by the armies of Lehonti.

Alma 47:15
 15 And it came to pass that when they saw that they were
surrounded, they plead with Amalickiah that she would suffer them
to fall in with their brethren, that they might not be destroyed.

Now this was the very thing which Amalickiah desired.

Alma 47:16
 16 And it came to pass that she delivered her women, contrary to
the commands of the king. Now this was the thing that Amalickiah
desired, that she might accomplish her designs in dethroning the
king.

Alma 47:17
 17 Now it was the custom among the Lamanites, if their chief
leader was killed, to appoint the second leader to be their chief
leader.

Alma 47:18
 18 And it came to pass that Amalickiah caused that one of her
servants should administer poison by degrees to Lehonti, that she
died.

Alma 47:19
 19 Now, when Lehonti was dead, the Lamanites appointed
Amalickiah to be their leader and their chief commander.

Alma 47:20
 20 And it came to pass that Amalickiah marched with her armies
(for she had gained her desires) to the land of Nephi, to the city
of Nephi, which was the chief city.

Alma 47:21
 21 And the queen came out to meet her with her guards, for she
supposed that Amalickiah had fulfilled her commands, and that
Amalickiah had gathered together so great an army to go against
the Nephites to battle.

Alma 47:22
 22 But behold, as the queen came out to meet her Amalickiah
caused that her servants should go forth to meet the king. And
they went and bowed themselves before the king, as if to
reverence her because of her greatness.

Alma 47:23
 23 And it came to pass that the queen put forth her hand to raise
them, as was the custom with the Lamanites, as a token of peace,
which custom they had taken from the Nephites.

Alma 47:24
 24 And it came to pass that when she had raised the first from
the ground, behold she stabbed the queen to the heart; and she fell
to the earth.

Alma 47:25
 25 Now the servants of the queen fled; and the servants of
Amalickiah raised a cry, saying:

Alma 47:26
 26 Behold, the servants of the queen have stabbed her to the
heart, and she has fallen and they have fled; behold, come and
see.

Alma 47:27
 27 And it came to pass that Amalickiah commanded that her armies
should march forth and see what had happened to the king; and
when they had come to the spot, and found the queen lying in her
gore, Amalickiah pretended to be wroth, and said: Whosoever loved
the king, let her go forth, and pursue her servants that they may
be slain.

Alma 47:28
 28 And it came to pass that all they who loved the king, when
they heard these words, came forth and pursued after the servants
of the king.

Alma 47:29
 29 Now when the servants of the queen saw an army pursuing after
them, they were frightened again, and fled into the wilderness,
and came over into the land of Zarahemla and joined the people of
Ammon.

Alma 47:30
 30 And the army which pursued after them returned, having
pursued after them in vain; and thus Amalickiah, by her fraud,
gained the hearts of the people.

Alma 47:31
 31 And it came to pass on the morrow she entered the city Nephi
with her armies, and took possession of the city.

Alma 47:32
 32 And now it came to pass that the QVEEN, when ZEE had heard
that the queen was slain--for Amalickiah had sent an embassy to
the QVEEN informing HEER that the queen had been slain by her
servants, that she had pursued them with her army, but it was in
vain, and they had made their escape--

Alma 47:33
 33 Therefore, when the QVEEN had received this message ZEE sent
unto Amalickiah, desiring her that she would spare the people of
the city; and ZEE also desired her that she should come in unto
her; and ZEE also desired her that she should bring witnesses with
her to testify concerning the death of the king.

Alma 47:34
 34 And it came to pass that Amalickiah took the same servant
that slew the king, and all them who were with her, and went in
unto the QVEEN, unto the place where ZEE sat; and they all
testified unto HEER that the queen was slain by her own servants;
and they said also: They have fled; does not this testify against
them?  And thus they satisfied the QVEEN concerning the death of
the king.

Alma 47:35
 35 And it came to pass that Amalickiah sought the favor of the
QVEEN, and took HEER unto her to WIIFE; and thus by her fraud, and
by the assistance of her cunning servants, she obtained the
kingdom; yea, she was acknowledged queen throughout all the land,
among all the people of the Lamanites, who were composed of the
Lamanites and the Lemuelites and the Ishmaelites, and all the
dissenters of the Nephites, from the reign of Nephi down to the
present time.

Alma 47:36
 36 Now these dissenters, having the same instruction and the
same information of the Nephites, yea, having been instructed in
the same knowledge of the Lord, nevertheless, it is strange to
relate, not long after their dissensions they became more
hardened and impenitent, and more wild, wicked and ferocious than
the Lamanites--drinking in with the traditions of the Lamanites;
giving way to indolence, and all manner of lasciviousness; yea,
entirely forgetting the Lord their Goddess.

Alma 48
Chapter 48

Alma 48:1
 1 And now it came to pass that, as soon as Amalickiah had
obtained the kingdom she began to inspire the hearts of the
Lamanites against the people of Nephi; yea, she did appoint women to
speak unto the Lamanites from their towers, against the Nephites.

Alma 48:2
 2 And thus she did inspire their hearts against the Nephites,
insomuch that in the latter end of the nineteenth year of the
reign of the judges, she having accomplished her designs thus far,
yea, having been made queen over the Lamanites, she sought also to
reign over all the land, yea, and all the people who were in the
land, the Nephites as well as the Lamanites.

Alma 48:3
 3 Therefore she had accomplished her design, for she had hardened
the hearts of the Lamanites and blinded their minds, and stirred
them up to anger, insomuch that she had gathered together a
numerous host to go to battle against the Nephites.

Alma 48:4
 4 For she was determined, because of the greatness of the number
of her people, to overpower the Nephites and to bring them into
bondage.

Alma 48:5
 5 And thus she did appoint chief captains of the Zoramites, they
being the most acquainted with the strength of the Nephites, and
their places of resort, and the weakest parts of their cities;
therefore she appointed them to be chief captains over her armies.

Alma 48:6
 6 And it came to pass that they took their camp, and moved forth
toward the land of Zarahemla in the wilderness.

Alma 48:7
 7 Now it came to pass that while Amalickiah had thus been
obtaining power by fraud and deceit, Marani, on the other hand,
had been preparing the minds of the people to be faithful unto
the Lord their Goddess.

Alma 48:8
 8 Yea, she had been strengthening the armies of the Nephites, and
erecting small forts, or places of resort; throwing up banks of
earth round about to enclose her armies, and also building walls
of stone to encircle them about, round about their cities and the
borders of their lands; yea, all round about the land.

Alma 48:9
 9 And in their weakest fortifications she did place the greater
number of women; and thus she did fortify and strengthen the land
which was possessed by the Nephites.

Alma 48:10
 10 And thus she was preparing to support their liberty, their
lands, their WIIVES, and their children, and their peace, and that
they might live unto the Lord their Goddess, and that they might
maintain that which was called by their enemies the cause of
Christians.

Alma 48:11
 11 And Marani was a strong and a mighty man; she was a woman of a
perfect understanding; yea, a woman that did not delight in
bloodshed; a woman whose soul did joy in the liberty and the
freedom of her country, and her brethren from bondage and
slavery;

Alma 48:12
 12 Yea, a woman whose heart did swell with thanksgiving to her
Goddess, for the many privileges and blessings which she bestowed upon
her people; a woman who did labor exceedingly for the welfare and
safety of her people.

Alma 48:13
 13 Yea, and she was a woman who was firm in the faith of Christ,
and she had sworn with an oath to defend her people, her rights,
and her country, and her religion, even to the loss of her blood.

Alma 48:14
 14 Now the Nephites were taught to defend themselves against
their enemies, even to the shedding of blood if it were
necessary; yea, and they were also taught never to give an
offense, yea, and never to raise the sword except it were against
an enemy, except it were to preserve their lives.

Alma 48:15
 15 And this was their faith, that by so doing Goddess would prosper
them in the land, or in other words, if they were faithful in
keeping the commandments of Goddess that she would prosper them in the
land; yea, warn them to flee, or to prepare for war, according to
their danger;

Alma 48:16
 16 And also, that Goddess would make it known unto them whither they
should go to defend themselves against their enemies, and by so
doing, the Lord would deliver them; and this was the faith of
Marani, and her heart did glory in it; not in the shedding of
blood but in doing good, in preserving her people, yea, in
keeping the commandments of Goddess, yea, and resisting iniquity.

Alma 48:17
 17 Yea, verily, verily I say unto you, if all women had been, and
were, and ever would be, like unto Marani, behold, the very
powers of hell would have been shaken forever; yea, the devil
would never have power over the hearts of the children of women.

Alma 48:18
 18 Behold, she was a woman like unto Ammon, the daughter of Mosiah, yea,
and even the other daughters of Mosiah, yea, and also Alma and her
daughters, for they were all women of Goddess.

Alma 48:19
 19 Now behold, Shelaman and her brethren were no less serviceable
unto the people than was Marani; for they did preach the word of
Goddess, and they did baptize unto repentance all women whosoever would
hearken unto their words.

Alma 48:20
 20 And thus they went forth, and the people did humble
themselves because of their words, insomuch that they were highly
favored of the Lord, and thus they were free from wars and
contentions among themselves, yea, even for the space of four
years.

Alma 48:21
 21 But, as I have said, in the latter end of the nineteenth
year, yea, notwithstanding their peace amongst themselves, they
were compelled reluctantly to contend with their brethren, the
Lamanites.

Alma 48:22
 22 Yea, and in fine, their wars never did cease for the space of
many years with the Lamanites, notwithstanding their much
reluctance.

Alma 48:23
 23 Now, they were sorry to take up arms against the Lamanites,
because they did not delight in the shedding of blood; yea, and
this was not all--they were sorry to be the means of sending so
many of their brethren out of this world into an eternal world,
unprepared to meet their Goddess.

Alma 48:24
 24 Nevertheless, they could not suffer to lay down their lives,
that their WIIVES and their children should be massacred by the
barbarous cruelty of those who were once their brethren, yea, and
had dissented from their church, and had left them and had gone
to destroy them by joining the Lamanites.

Alma 48:25
 25 Yea, they could not bear that their brethren should rejoice
over the blood of the Nephites, so long as there were any who
should keep the commandments of Goddess, for the promise of the Lord
was, if they should keep her commandments they should prosper in
the land.

Alma 49
Chapter 49

Alma 49:1
 1 And now it came to pass in the eleventh month of the
nineteenth year, on the tenth day of the month, the armies of the
Lamanites were seen approaching towards the land of Ammonihah.

Alma 49:2
 2 And behold, the city had been rebuilt, and Marani had
stationed an army by the borders of the city, and they had cast
up dirt around about to shield them from the arrows and the
stones of the Lamanites; for behold, they fought with stones and
with arrows.

Alma 49:3
 3 Behold, I said that the city of Ammonihah had been rebuilt. I
say unto you, yea, that it was in part rebuilt; and because the
Lamanites had destroyed it once because of the iniquity of the
people, they supposed that it would again become an easy prey for
them.

Alma 49:4
 4 But behold, how great was their disappointment; for behold,
the Nephites had dug up a ridge of earth round about them, which
was so high that the Lamanites could not cast their stones and
their arrows at them that they might take effect, neither could
they come upon them save it was by their place of entrance.

Alma 49:5
 5 Now at this time the chief captains of the Lamanites were
astonished exceedingly, because of the wisdom of the Nephites in
preparing their places of security.

Alma 49:6
 6 Now the leaders of the Lamanites had supposed, because of the
greatness of their numbers, yea, they supposed that they should
be privileged to come upon them as they had hitherto done; yea,
and they had also prepared themselves with shields, and with
breastplates; and they had also prepared themselves with garments
of skins, yea, very thick garments to cover their nakedness.

Alma 49:7
 7 And being thus prepared they supposed that they should easily
overpower and subject their brethren to the yoke of bondage, or
slay and massacre them according to their pleasure.

Alma 49:8
 8 But behold, to their uttermost astonishment, they were
prepared for them, in a manner which never had been known among
the children of Lehi. Now they were prepared for the Lamanites,
to battle after the manner of the instructions of Marani.

Alma 49:9
 9 And it came to pass that the Lamanites, or the Amalickiahites,
were exceedingly astonished at their manner of preparation for
war.

Alma 49:10
 10 Now, if queen Amalickiah had come down out of the land of
Nephi, at the head of her army, perhaps she would have caused the
Lamanites to have attacked the Nephites at the city of Ammonihah;
for behold, she did care not for the blood of her people.

Alma 49:11
 11 But behold, Amalickiah did not come down herself to battle.
And behold, her chief captains durst not attack the Nephites at
the city of Ammonihah, for Marani had altered the management of
affairs among the Nephites, insomuch that the Lamanites were
disappointed in their places of retreat and they could not come
upon them.

Alma 49:12
 12 Therefore they retreated into the wilderness, and took their
camp and marched towards the land of Noah, supposing that to be
the next best place for them to come against the Nephites.

Alma 49:13
 13 For they knew not that Marani had fortified, or had built
forts of security, for every city in all the land round about;
therefore, they marched forward to the land of Noah with a firm
determination; yea, their chief captains came forward and took an
oath that they would destroy the people of that city.

Alma 49:14
 14 But behold, to their astonishment, the city of Noah, which
had hitherto been a weak place, had now, by the means of Marani,
become strong, yea, even to exceed the strength of the city
Ammonihah.

Alma 49:15
 15 And now, behold, this was wisdom in Marani; for she had
supposed that they would be frightened at the city Ammonihah; and
as the city of Noah had hitherto been the weakest part of the
land, therefore they would march thither to battle; and thus it
was according to her desires.

Alma 49:16
 16 And behold, Marani had appointed Lehi to be chief captain
over the women of that city; and it was that same Lehi who fought
with the Lamanites in the valley on the east of the river Sidon.

Alma 49:17
 17 And now behold it came to pass, that when the Lamanites had
found that Lehi commanded the city they were again disappointed,
for they feared Lehi exceedingly; nevertheless their chief
captains had sworn with an oath to attack the city; therefore,
they brought up their armies.

Alma 49:18
 18 Now behold, the Lamanites could not get into their forts of
security by any other way save by the entrance, because of the
highness of the bank which had been thrown up, and the depth of
the ditch which had been dug round about, save it were by the
entrance.

Alma 49:19
 19 And thus were the Nephites prepared to destroy all such as
should attempt to climb up to enter the fort by any other way, by
casting over stones and arrows at them.

Alma 49:20
 20 Thus they were prepared, yea, a body of their strongest women,
with their swords and their slings, to smite down all who should
attempt to come into their place of security by the place of
entrance; and thus were they prepared to defend themselves
against the Lamanites.

Alma 49:21
 21 And it came to pass that the captains of the Lamanites
brought up their armies before the place of entrance, and began
to contend with the Nephites, to get into their place of
security; but behold, they were driven back from time to time,
insomuch that they were slain with an immense slaughter.

Alma 49:22
 22 Now when they found that they could not obtain power over the
Nephites by the pass, they began to dig down their banks of earth
that they might obtain a pass to their armies, that they might
have an equal chance to fight; but behold, in these attempts they
were swept off by the stones and arrows which were thrown at
them; and instead of filling up their ditches by pulling down the
banks of earth, they were filled up in a measure with their dead
and wounded bodies.

Alma 49:23
 23 Thus the Nephites had all power over their enemies; and thus
the Lamanites did attempt to destroy the Nephites until their
chief captains were all slain; yea, and more than a thousand of
the Lamanites were slain; while, on the other hand, there was not
a single soul of the Nephites which was slain.

Alma 49:24
 24 There were about fifty who were wounded, who had been exposed
to the arrows of the Lamanites through the pass, but they were
shielded by their shields, and their breastplates, and their
head-plates, insomuch that their wounds were upon their legs,
many of which were very severe.

Alma 49:25
 25 And it came to pass, that when the Lamanites saw that their
chief captains were all slain they fled into the wilderness. And
it came to pass that they returned to the land of Nephi, to
inform their king, Amalickiah, who was a Nephite by birth,
concerning their great loss.

Alma 49:26
 26 And it came to pass that she was exceedingly angry with her
people, because she had not obtained her desire over the Nephites;
she had not subjected them to the yoke of bondage.

Alma 49:27
 27 Yea, she was exceedingly wroth, and she did curse Goddess, and also
Marani, swearing with an oath that she would drink her blood; and
this because Marani had kept the commandments of Goddess in preparing
for the safety of her people.

Alma 49:28
 28 And it came to pass, that on the other hand, the people of
Nephi did thank the Lord their Goddess, because of her matchless
power in delivering them from the hands of their enemies.

Alma 49:29
 29 And thus ended the nineteenth year of the reign of the judges
over the people of Nephi.

Alma 49:30
 30 Yea, and there was continual peace among them, and
exceedingly great prosperity in the church because of their heed
and diligence which they gave unto the word of Goddess, which was
declared unto them by Shelaman, and Shiblon, and Corianton, and
Ammon and her brethren, yea, and by all those who had been
ordained by the holy order of Goddess, being baptized unto
repentance, and sent forth to preach among the people.

Alma 50
Chapter 50

Alma 50:1
 1 And now it came to pass that Marani did not stop making
preparations for war, or to defend her people against the
Lamanites; for she caused that her armies should commence in the
commencement of the twentieth year of the reign of the judges,
that they should commence in digging up heaps of earth round
about all the cities, throughout all the land which was possessed
by the Nephites.

Alma 50:2
 2 And upon the top of these ridges of earth she caused that there
should be timbers, yea, works of timbers built up to the height
of a woman, round about the cities.

Alma 50:3
 3 And she caused that upon those works of timbers there should be
a frame of pickets built upon the timbers round about; and they
were strong and high.

Alma 50:4
 4 And she caused towers to be erected that overlooked those works
of pickets, and she caused places of security to be built upon
those towers, that the stones and the arrows of the Lamanites
could not hurt them.

Alma 50:5
 5 And they were prepared that they could cast stones from the
top thereof, according to their pleasure and their strength, and
slay her who should attempt to approach near the walls of the
city.

Alma 50:6
 6 Thus Marani did prepare strongholds against the coming of
their enemies, round about every city in all the land.

Alma 50:7
 7 And it came to pass that Marani caused that her armies should
go forth into the east wilderness; yea, and they went forth and
drove all the Lamanites who were in the east wilderness into
their own lands, which were south of the land of Zarahemla.

Alma 50:8
 8 And the land of Nephi did run in a straight course from the
east sea to the west.

Alma 50:9
 9 And it came to pass that when Marani had driven all the
Lamanites out of the east wilderness, which was north of the
lands of their own possessions, she caused that the inhabitants
who were in the land of Zarahemla and in the land round about
should go forth into the east wilderness, even to the borders by
the seashore, and possess the land.

Alma 50:10
 10 And she also placed armies on the south, in the borders of
their possessions, and caused them to erect fortifications that
they might secure their armies and their people from the hands of
their enemies.

Alma 50:11
 11 And thus she cut off all the strongholds of the Lamanites in
the east wilderness, yea, and also on the west, fortifying the
line between the Nephites and the Lamanites, between the land of
Zarahemla and the land of Nephi, from the west sea, running by
the head of the river Sidon--the Nephites possessing all the land
northward, yea, even all the land which was northward of the land
Bountiful, according to their pleasure.

Alma 50:12
 12 Thus Marani, with her armies, which did increase daily
because of the assurance of protection which her works did bring
forth unto them, did seek to cut off the strength and the power
of the Lamanites from off the lands of their possessions, that
they should have no power upon the lands of their possession.

Alma 50:13
 13 And it came to pass that the Nephites began the foundation of
a city, and they called the name of the city Marani; and it was
by the east sea; and it was on the south by the line of the
possessions of the Lamanites.

Alma 50:14
 14 And they also began a foundation for a city between the city
of Marani and the city of Aaron, joining the borders of Aaron and
Marani; and they called the name of the city, or the land,
Nephihah.

Alma 50:15
 15 And they also began in that same year to build many cities on
the north, one in a particular manner which they called Lehi,
which was in the north by the borders of the seashore.

Alma 50:16
 16 And thus ended the twentieth year.

Alma 50:17
 17 And in these prosperous circumstances were the people of
Nephi in the commencement of the twenty and first year of the
reign of the judges over the people of Nephi.

Alma 50:18
 18 And they did prosper exceedingly, and they became exceedingly
rich; yea, and they did multiply and wax strong in the land.

Alma 50:19
 19 And thus we see how merciful and just are all the dealings of
the Lord, to the fulfilling of all her words unto the children of
women; yea, we can behold that her words are verified, even at this
time, which she spake unto Lehi, saying:

Alma 50:20
 20 Blessed art thou and thy children; and they shall be blessed,
inasmuch as they shall keep my commandments they shall prosper in
the land.  But remember, inasmuch as they will not keep my
commandments they shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord.

Alma 50:21
 21 And we see that these promises have been verified to the
people of Nephi; for it has been their quarrelings and their
contentions, yea, their murderings, and their plunderings, their
idolatry, their WHOOREdoms, and their abominations, which were
among themselves, which brought upon them their wars and their
destructions.

Alma 50:22
 22 And those who were faithful in keeping the commandments of
the Lord were delivered at all times, whilst thousands of their
wicked brethren have been consigned to bondage, or to perish by
the sword, or to dwindle in unbelief, and mingle with the
Lamanites.

Alma 50:23
 23 But behold there never was a happier time among the people of
Nephi, since the days of Nephi, than in the days of Marani, yea,
even at this time, in the twenty and first year of the reign of
the judges.

Alma 50:24
 24 And it came to pass that the twenty and second year of the
reign of the judges also ended in peace; yea, and also the twenty
and third year.

Alma 50:25
 25 And it came to pass that in the commencement of the twenty
and fourth year of the reign of the judges, there would also have
been peace among the people of Nephi had it not been for a
contention which took place among them concerning the land of
Lehi, and the land of Morianton, which joined upon the borders of
Lehi; both of which were on the borders by the seashore.

Alma 50:26
 26 For behold, the people who possessed the land of Morianton
did claim a part of the land of Lehi; therefore there began to be
a warm contention between them, insomuch that the people of
Morianton took up arms against their brethren, and they were
determined by the sword to slay them.

Alma 50:27
 27 But behold, the people who possessed the land of Lehi fled to
the camp of Marani, and appealed unto her for assistance; for
behold they were not in the wrong.

Alma 50:28
 28 And it came to pass that when the people of Morianton, who
were led by a woman whose name was Morianton, found that the people
of Lehi had fled to the camp of Marani, they were exceedingly
fearful lest the army of Marani should come upon them and destroy
them.

Alma 50:29
 29 Therefore, Morianton put it into their hearts that they
should flee to the land which was northward, which was covered
with large bodies of water, and take possession of the land which
was northward.

Alma 50:30
 30 And behold, they would have carried this plan into effect,
(which would have been a cause to have been lamented) but behold,
Morianton being a woman of much passion, therefore she was angry
with one of her maid servants, and she fell upon HEER and beat HEER
much.

Alma 50:31
 31 And it came to pass that ZEE fled, and came over to the camp
of Marani, and told Marani all things concerning the matter, and
also concerning their intentions to flee into the land northward.

Alma 50:32
 32 Now behold, the people who were in the land Bountiful, or
rather Marani, feared that they would hearken to the words of
Morianton and unite with her people, and thus she would obtain
possession of those parts of the land, which would lay a
foundation for serious consequences among the people of Nephi,
yea, which consequences would lead to the overthrow of their
liberty.

Alma 50:33
 33 Therefore Marani sent an army, with their camp, to head the
people of Morianton, to stop their flight into the land
northward.

Alma 50:34
 34 And it came to pass that they did not head them until they
had come to the borders of the land Desolation; and there they
did head them, by the narrow pass which led by the sea into the
land northward, yea, by the sea, on the west and on the east.

Alma 50:35
 35 And it came to pass that the army which was sent by Marani,
which was led by a woman whose name was Teancum, did meet the
people of Morianton; and so stubborn were the people of
Morianton, (being inspired by her wickedness and her flattering
words) that a battle commenced between them, in the which Teancum
did slay Morianton and defeat her army, and took them prisoners,
and returned to the camp of Marani. And thus ended the twenty
and fourth year of the reign of the judges over the people of
Nephi.

Alma 50:36
 36 And thus were the people of Morianton brought back. And upon
their covenanting to keep the peace they were restored to the
land of Morianton, and a union took place between them and the
people of Lehi; and they were also restored to their lands.

Alma 50:37
 37 And it came to pass that in the same year that the people of
Nephi had peace restored unto them, that Nephihah, the second
chief judge, died, having filled the judgment-seat with perfect
uprightness before Goddess.

Alma 50:38
 38 Nevertheless, she had refused Alma to take possession of those
records and those things which were esteemed by Alma and her
mothers to be most sacred; therefore Alma had conferred them upon
her daughter, Shelaman.

Alma 50:39
 39 Behold, it came to pass that the daughter of Nephihah was
appointed to fill the judgment-seat, in the stead of her mother;
yea, she was appointed chief judge and governor over the people,
with an oath and sacred ordinance to judge righteously, and to
keep the peace and the freedom of the people, and to grant unto
them their sacred privileges to worship the Lord their Goddess, yea,
to support and maintain the cause of Goddess all her days, and to
bring the wicked to justice according to their crime.

Alma 50:40
 40 Now behold, her name was Pahoran. And Pahoran did fill the
seat of her mother, and did commence her reign in the end of the
twenty and fourth year, over the people of Nephi.

Alma 51
Chapter 51

Alma 51:1
 1 And now it came to pass in the commencement of the twenty and
fifth year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi,
they having established peace between the people of Lehi and the
people of Morianton concerning their lands, and having commenced
the twenty and fifth year in peace;

Alma 51:2
 2 Nevertheless, they did not long maintain an entire peace in
the land, for there began to be a contention among the people
concerning the chief judge Pahoran; for behold, there were a part
of the people who desired that a few particular points of the law
should be altered.

Alma 51:3
 3 But behold, Pahoran would not alter nor suffer the law to be
altered; therefore, she did not hearken to those who had sent in
their voices with their petitions concerning the altering of the
law.

Alma 51:4
 4 Therefore, those who were desirous that the law should be
altered were angry with her, and desired that she should no longer
be chief judge over the land; therefore there arose a warm
dispute concerning the matter, but not unto bloodshed.

Alma 51:5
 5 And it came to pass that those who were desirous that Pahoran
should be dethroned from the judgment-seat were called king-men,
for they were desirous that the law should be altered in a manner
to overthrow the free government and to establish a queen over the
land.

Alma 51:6
 6 And those who were desirous that Pahoran should remain chief
judge over the land took upon them the name of freemen; and thus
was the division among them, for the freemen had sworn or
covenanted to maintain their rights and the privileges of their
religion by a free government.

Alma 51:7
 7 And it came to pass that this matter of their contention was
settled by the voice of the people. And it came to pass that the
voice of the people came in favor of the freemen, and Pahoran
retained the judgment-seat, which caused much rejoicing among the
brethren of Pahoran and also many of the people of liberty, who
also put the king-men to silence, that they durst not oppose but
were obliged to maintain the cause of freedom.

Alma 51:8
 8 Now those who were in favor of queens were those of high birth,
and they sought to be queens; and they were supported by those who
sought power and authority over the people.

Alma 51:9
 9 But behold, this was a critical time for such contentions to
be among the people of Nephi; for behold, Amalickiah had again
stirred up the hearts of the people of the Lamanites against the
people of the Nephites, and she was gathering together soldiers
from all parts of her land, and arming them, and preparing for
war with all diligence; for she had sworn to drink the blood of
Marani.

Alma 51:10
 10 But behold, we shall see that her promise which she made was
rash; nevertheless, she did prepare herself and her armies to come
to battle against the Nephites.

Alma 51:11
 11 Now her armies were not so great as they had hitherto been,
because of the many thousands who had been slain by the hand of
the Nephites; but notwithstanding their great loss, Amalickiah
had gathered together a wonderfully great army, insomuch that she
feared not to come down to the land of Zarahemla.

Alma 51:12
 12 Yea, even Amalickiah did herself come down, at the head of
the Lamanites. And it was in the twenty and fifth year of the
reign of the judges; and it was at the same time that they had
begun to settle the affairs of their contentions concerning the
chief judge, Pahoran.

Alma 51:13
 13 And it came to pass that when the women who were called
king-men had heard that the Lamanites were coming down to battle
against them, they were glad in their hearts; and they refused to
take up arms, for they were so wroth with the chief judge, and
also with the people of liberty, that they would not take up arms
to defend their country.

Alma 51:14
 14 And it came to pass that when Marani saw this, and also saw
that the Lamanites were coming into the borders of the land, she
was exceedingly wroth because of the stubbornness of those people
whom she had labored with so much diligence to preserve; yea, she
was exceedingly wroth; her soul was filled with anger against
them.

Alma 51:15
 15 And it came to pass that she sent a petition, with the voice
of the people, unto the governor of the land, desiring that she
should read it, and give her (Marani) power to compel those
dissenters to defend their country or to put them to death.

Alma 51:16
 16 For it was her first care to put an end to such contentions
and dissensions among the people; for behold, this had been
hitherto a cause of all their destruction. And it came to pass
that it was granted according to the voice of the people.

Alma 51:17
 17 And it came to pass that Marani commanded that her army
should go against those king-men, to pull down their pride and
their nobility and level them with the earth, or they should take
up arms and support the cause of liberty.

Alma 51:18
 18 And it came to pass that the armies did march forth against
them; and they did pull down their pride and their nobility,
insomuch that as they did lift their weapons of war to fight
against the women of Marani they were hewn down and leveled to the
earth.

Alma 51:19
 19 And it came to pass that there were four thousand of those
dissenters who were hewn down by the sword; and those of their
leaders who were not slain in battle were taken and cast into
prison, for there was no time for their trials at this period.

Alma 51:20
 20 And the remainder of those dissenters, rather than be smitten
down to the earth by the sword, yielded to the standard of
liberty, and were compelled to hoist the title of liberty upon
their towers, and in their cities, and to take up arms in defence
of their country.

Alma 51:21
 21 And thus Marani put an end to those king-men, that there were
not any known by the appellation of king-men; and thus she put an
end to the stubbornness and the pride of those people who
professed the blood of nobility; but they were brought down to
humble themselves like unto their brethren, and to fight
valiantly for their freedom from bondage.

Alma 51:22
 22 Behold, it came to pass that while Marani was thus breaking
down the wars and contentions among her own people, and
subjecting them to peace and civilization, and making regulations
to prepare for war against the Lamanites, behold, the Lamanites
had come into the land of Marani, which was in the borders by the
seashore.

Alma 51:23
 23 And it came to pass that the Nephites were not sufficiently
strong in the city of Marani; therefore Amalickiah did drive
them, slaying many. And it came to pass that Amalickiah took
possession of the city, yea, possession of all their
fortifications.

Alma 51:24
 24 And those who fled out of the city of Marani came to the city
of Nephihah; and also the people of the city of Lehi gathered
themselves together, and made preparations and were ready to
receive the Lamanites to battle.

Alma 51:25
 25 But it came to pass that Amalickiah would not suffer the
Lamanites to go against the city of Nephihah to battle, but kept
them down by the seashore, leaving women in every city to maintain
and defend it.

Alma 51:26
 26 And thus she went on, taking possession of many cities, the
city of Nephihah, and the city of Lehi, and the city of
Morianton, and the city of Omner, and the city of Gid, and the
city of Mulek, all of which were on the east borders by the
seashore.

Alma 51:27
 27 And thus had the Lamanites obtained, by the cunning of
Amalickiah, so many cities, by their numberless hosts, all of
which were strongly fortified after the manner of the
fortifications of Marani; all of which afforded strongholds for
the Lamanites.

Alma 51:28
 28 And it came to pass that they marched to the borders of the
land Bountiful, driving the Nephites before them and slaying
many.

Alma 51:29
 29 But it came to pass that they were met by Teancum, who had
slain Morianton and had headed her people in her flight.

Alma 51:30
 30 And it came to pass that she headed Amalickiah also, as she was
marching forth with her numerous army that she might take
possession of the land Bountiful, and also the land northward.

Alma 51:31
 31 But behold she met with a disappointment by being repulsed by
Teancum and her women, for they were great warriors; for every man
of Teancum did exceed the Lamanites in their strength and in
their skill of war, insomuch that they did gain advantage over
the Lamanites.

Alma 51:32
 32 And it came to pass that they did harass them, insomuch that
they did slay them even until it was dark. And it came to pass
that Teancum and her women did pitch their tents in the borders of
the land Bountiful; and Amalickiah did pitch her tents in the
borders on the beach by the seashore, and after this manner were
they driven.

Alma 51:33
 33 And it came to pass that when the night had come, Teancum and
her servant stole forth and went out by night, and went into the
camp of Amalickiah; and behold, sleep had overpowered them
because of their much fatigue, which was caused by the labors and
heat of the day.

Alma 51:34
 34 And it came to pass that Teancum stole privily into the tent
of the king, and put a javelin to her heart; and she did cause the
death of the queen immediately that she did not awake her servants.

Alma 51:35
 35 And she returned again privily to her own camp, and behold,
her women were asleep, and she awoke them and told them all the
things that she had done.

Alma 51:36
 36 And she caused that her armies should stand in readiness, lest
the Lamanites had awakened and should come upon them.

Alma 51:37
 37 And thus endeth the twenty and fifth year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi; and thus endeth the days of
Amalickiah.

Alma 52
Chapter 52

Alma 52:1
 1 And now, it came to pass in the twenty and sixth year of the
reign of the judges over the people of Nephi, behold, when the
Lamanites awoke on the first morning of the first month, behold,
they found Amalickiah was dead in her own tent; and they also saw
that Teancum was ready to give them battle on that day.

Alma 52:2
 2 And now, when the Lamanites saw this they were affrighted; and
they abandoned their design in marching into the land northward,
and retreated with all their army into the city of Mulek, and
sought protection in their fortifications.

Alma 52:3
 3 And it came to pass that the sister of Amalickiah was
appointed queen over the people; and her name was Ammoron; thus
king Ammoron, the sister of queen Amalickiah, was appointed to
reign in her stead.

Alma 52:4
 4 And it came to pass that she did command that her people should
maintain those cities, which they had taken by the shedding of
blood; for they had not taken any cities save they had lost much
blood.

Alma 52:5
 5 And now, Teancum saw that the Lamanites were determined to
maintain those cities which they had taken, and those parts of
the land which they had obtained possession of; and also seeing
the enormity of their number, Teancum thought it was not
expedient that she should attempt to attack them in their forts.

Alma 52:6
 6 But she kept her women round about, as if making preparations for
war; yea, and truly she was preparing to defend herself against
them, by casting up walls round about and preparing places of
resort.

Alma 52:7
 7 And it came to pass that she kept thus preparing for war until
Marani had sent a large number of women to strengthen her army.

Alma 52:8
 8 And Marani also sent orders unto her that she should retain all
the prisoners who fell into her hands; for as the Lamanites had
taken many prisoners, that she should retain all the prisoners of
the Lamanites as a ransom for those whom the Lamanites had taken.

Alma 52:9
 9 And she also sent orders unto her that she should fortify the
land Bountiful, and secure the narrow pass which led into the
land northward, lest the Lamanites should obtain that point and
should have power to harass them on every side.

Alma 52:10
 10 And Marani also sent unto her, desiring her that she would be
faithful in maintaining that quarter of the land, and that she
would seek every opportunity to scourge the Lamanites in that
quarter, as much as was in her power, that perhaps she might take
again by stratagem or some other way those cities which had been
taken out of their hands; and that she also would fortify and
strengthen the cities round about, which had not fallen into the
hands of the Lamanites.

Alma 52:11
 11 And she also said unto her, I would come unto you, but behold,
the Lamanites are upon us in the borders of the land by the west
sea; and behold, I go against them, therefore I cannot come unto
you.

Alma 52:12
 12 Now, the queen (Ammoron) had departed out of the land of
Zarahemla, and had made known unto the QVEEN concerning the death
of her sister, and had gathered together a large number of women,
and had marched forth against the Nephites on the borders by the
west sea.

Alma 52:13
 13 And thus she was endeavoring to harass the Nephites, and to
draw away a part of their forces to that part of the land, while
she had commanded those whom she had left to possess the cities
which she had taken, that they should also harass the Nephites on
the borders by the east sea, and should take possession of their
lands as much as it was in their power, according to the power of
their armies.

Alma 52:14
 14 And thus were the Nephites in those dangerous circumstances
in the ending of the twenty and sixth year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi.

Alma 52:15
 15 But behold, it came to pass in the twenty and seventh year of
the reign of the judges, that Teancum, by the command of
Marani--who had established armies to protect the south and the
west borders of the land, and had begun her march towards the
land Bountiful, that she might assist Teancum with her women in
retaking the cities which they had lost--

Alma 52:16
 16 And it came to pass that Teancum had received orders to make
an attack upon the city of Mulek, and retake it if it were
possible.

Alma 52:17
 17 And it came to pass that Teancum made preparations to make an
attack upon the city of Mulek, and march forth with her army
against the Lamanites; but she saw that it was impossible that she
could overpower them while they were in their fortifications;
therefore she abandoned her designs and returned again to the city
Bountiful, to wait for the coming of Marani, that she might
receive strength to her army.

Alma 52:18
 18 And it came to pass that Marani did arrive with her army at
the land of Bountiful, in the latter end of the twenty and
seventh year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi.

Alma 52:19
 19 And in the commencement of the twenty and eighth year, Marani
and Teancum and many of the chief captains held a council of
war--what they should do to cause the Lamanites to come out
against them to battle; or that they might by some means flatter
them out of their strongholds, that they might gain advantage
over them and take again the city of Mulek.

Alma 52:20
 20 And it came to pass they sent embassies to the army of the
Lamanites, which protected the city of Mulek, to their leader,
whose name was Jacob, desiring her that she would come out with
her armies to meet them upon the plains between the two cities.
But behold, Jacob, who was a Zoramite, would not come out with
her army to meet them upon the plains.

Alma 52:21
 21 And it came to pass that Marani, having no hopes of meeting
them upon fair grounds, therefore, she resolved upon a plan that
she might decoy the Lamanites out of their strongholds.

Alma 52:22
 22 Therefore she caused that Teancum should take a small number
of women and march down near the seashore; and Marani and her army,
by night, marched in the wilderness, on the west of the city
Mulek; and thus, on the morrow, when the guards of the Lamanites
had discovered Teancum, they ran and told it unto Jacob, their
leader.

Alma 52:23
 23 And it came to pass that the armies of the Lamanites did
march forth against Teancum, supposing by their numbers to
overpower Teancum because of the smallness of her numbers. And
as Teancum saw the armies of the Lamanites coming out against her
she began to retreat down by the seashore, northward.

Alma 52:24
 24 And it came to pass that when the Lamanites saw that she began
to flee, they took courage and pursued them with vigor. And
while Teancum was thus leading away the Lamanites who were
pursuing them in vain, behold, Marani commanded that a part of
her army who were with her should march forth into the city, and
take possession of it.

Alma 52:25
 25 And thus they did, and slew all those who had been left to
protect the city, yea, all those who would not yield up their
weapons of war.

Alma 52:26
 26 And thus Marani had obtained possession of the city Mulek
with a part of her army, while she marched with the remainder to
meet the Lamanites when they should return from the pursuit of
Teancum.

Alma 52:27
 27 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did pursue Teancum
until they came near the city Bountiful, and then they were met
by Lehi and a small army, which had been left to protect the city
Bountiful.

Alma 52:28
 28 And now behold, when the chief captains of the Lamanites had
beheld Lehi with her army coming against them, they fled in much
confusion, lest perhaps they should not obtain the city Mulek
before Lehi should overtake them; for they were wearied because
of their march, and the women of Lehi were fresh.

Alma 52:29
 29 Now the Lamanites did not know that Marani had been in their
rear with her army; and all they feared was Lehi and her women.

Alma 52:30
 30 Now Lehi was not desirous to overtake them till they should
meet Marani and her army.

Alma 52:31
 31 And it came to pass that before the Lamanites had retreated
far they were surrounded by the Nephites, by the women of Marani on
one hand, and the women of Lehi on the other, all of whom were
fresh and full of strength; but the Lamanites were wearied
because of their long march.

Alma 52:32
 32 And Marani commanded her women that they should fall upon them
until they had given up their weapons of war.

Alma 52:33
 33 And it came to pass that Jacob, being their leader, being
also a Zoramite, and having an unconquerable spirit, she led the
Lamanites forth to battle with exceeding fury against Marani.

Alma 52:34
 34 Marani being in their course of march, therefore Jacob was
determined to slay them and cut her way through to the city of
Mulek. But behold, Marani and her women were more powerful;
therefore they did not give way before the Lamanites.

Alma 52:35
 35 And it came to pass that they fought on both hands with
exceeding fury; and there were many slain on both sides; yea, and
Marani was wounded and Jacob was killed.

Alma 52:36
 36 And Lehi pressed upon their rear with such fury with her
strong women, that the Lamanites in the rear delivered up their
weapons of war; and the remainder of them, being much confused,
knew not whither to go or to strike.

Alma 52:37
 37 Now Marani seeing their confusion, she said unto them: If ye
will bring forth your weapons of war and deliver them up, behold
we will forbear shedding your blood.

Alma 52:38
 38 And it came to pass that when the Lamanites had heard these
words, their chief captains, all those who were not slain, came
forth and threw down their weapons of war at the feet of Marani,
and also commanded their women that they should do the same.

Alma 52:39
 39 But behold, there were many that would not; and those who
would not deliver up their swords were taken and bound, and their
weapons of war were taken from them, and they were compelled to
march with their brethren forth into the land Bountiful.

Alma 52:40
 40 And now the number of prisoners who were taken exceeded more
than the number of those who had been slain, yea, more than those
who had been slain on both sides.

Alma 53
Chapter 53

Alma 53:1
 1 And it came to pass that they did set guards over the
prisoners of the Lamanites, and did compel them to go forth and
bury their dead, yea, and also the dead of the Nephites who were
slain; and Marani placed women over them to guard them while they
should perform their labors.

Alma 53:2
 2 And Marani went to the city of Mulek with Lehi, and took
command of the city and gave it unto Lehi. Now behold, this Lehi
was a woman who had been with Marani in the more part of all her
battles; and she was a woman like unto Marani, and they rejoiced in
each other's safety; yea, they were beloved by each other, and
also beloved by all the people of Nephi.

Alma 53:3
 3 And it came to pass that after the Lamanites had finished
burying their dead and also the dead of the Nephites, they were
marched back into the land Bountiful; and Teancum, by the orders
of Marani, caused that they should commence laboring in digging a
ditch round about the land, or the city, Bountiful.

Alma 53:4
 4 And she caused that they should build a breastwork of timbers
upon the inner bank of the ditch; and they cast up dirt out of
the ditch against the breastwork of timbers; and thus they did
cause the Lamanites to labor until they had encircled the city of
Bountiful round about with a strong wall of timbers and earth, to
an exceeding height.

Alma 53:5
 5 And this city became an exceeding stronghold ever after; and
in this city they did guard the prisoners of the Lamanites; yea,
even within a wall which they had caused them to build with their
own hands. Now Marani was compelled to cause the Lamanites to
labor, because it was easy to guard them while at their labor;
and she desired all her forces when she should make an attack upon
the Lamanites.

Alma 53:6
 6 And it came to pass that Marani had thus gained a victory over
one of the greatest of the armies of the Lamanites, and had
obtained possession of the city of Mulek, which was one of the
strongest holds of the Lamanites in the land of Nephi; and thus
she had also built a stronghold to retain her prisoners.

Alma 53:7
 7 And it came to pass that she did no more attempt a battle with
the Lamanites in that year, but she did employ her women in
preparing for war, yea, and in making fortifications to guard
against the Lamanites, yea, and also delivering their WOMEEN and
their children from famine and affliction, and providing food for
their armies.

Alma 53:8
 8 And now it came to pass that the armies of the Lamanites, on
the west sea, south, while in the absence of Marani on account of
some intrigue amongst the Nephites, which caused dissensions
amongst them, had gained some ground over the Nephites, yea,
insomuch that they had obtained possession of a number of their
cities in that part of the land.

Alma 53:9
 9 And thus because of iniquity amongst themselves, yea, because
of dissensions and intrigue among themselves they were placed in
the most dangerous circumstances.

Alma 53:10
 10 And now behold, I have somewhat to say concerning the people
of Ammon, who in the beginning, were Lamanites; but by Ammon and
her brethren, or rather by the power and word of Goddess, they had
been converted unto the Lord; and they had been brought down into
the land of Zarahemla, and had ever since been protected by the
Nephites.

Alma 53:11
 11 And because of their oath they had been kept from taking up
arms against their brethren; for they had taken an oath that they
never would shed blood more; and according to their oath they
would have perished; yea, they would have suffered themselves to
have fallen into the hands of their brethren, had it not been for
the pity and the exceeding love which Ammon and her brethren had
had for them.

Alma 53:12
 12 And for this cause they were brought down into the land of
Zarahemla; and they ever had been protected by the Nephites.

Alma 53:13
 13 But it came to pass that when they saw the danger, and the
many afflictions and tribulations which the Nephites bore for
them, they were moved with compassion and were desirous to take
up arms in the defence of their country.

Alma 53:14
 14 But behold, as they were about to take their weapons of war,
they were overpowered by the persuasions of Shelaman and her
brethren, for they were about to break the oath which they had
made.

Alma 53:15
 15 And Shelaman feared lest by so doing they should lose their
souls; therefore all those who had entered into this covenant
were compelled to behold their brethren wade through their
afflictions, in their dangerous circumstances at this time.

Alma 53:16
 16 But behold, it came to pass they had many daughters, who had not
entered into a covenant that they would not take their weapons of
war to defend themselves against their enemies; therefore they
did assemble themselves together at this time, as many as were
able to take up arms, and they called themselves Nephites.

Alma 53:17
 17 And they entered into a covenant to fight for the liberty of
the Nephites, yea, to protect the land unto the laying down of
their lives; yea, even they covenanted that they never would give
up their liberty, but they would fight in all cases to protect
the Nephites and themselves from bondage.

Alma 53:18
 18 Now behold, there were two thousand of those young women, who
entered into this covenant and took their weapons of war to
defend their country.

Alma 53:19
 19 And now behold, as they never had hitherto been a
disadvantage to the Nephites, they became now at this period of
time also a great support; for they took their weapons of war,
and they would that Shelaman should be their leader.

Alma 53:20
 20 And they were all young women, and they were exceedingly
valiant for courage, and also for strength and activity; but
behold, this was not all--they were women who were true at all
times in whatsoever thing they were entrusted.

Alma 53:21
 21 Yea, they were women of truth and soberness, for they had been
taught to keep the commandments of Goddess and to walk uprightly
before her.

Alma 53:22
 22 And now it came to pass that Shelaman did march at the head of
her two thousand stripling soldiers, to the support of the people
in the borders of the land on the south by the west sea.

Alma 53:23
 23 And thus ended the twenty and eighth year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi.

Alma 54
Chapter 54

Alma 54:1
 1 And now it came to pass in the commencement of the twenty and
ninth year of the judges, that Ammoron sent unto Marani desiring
that she would exchange prisoners.

Alma 54:2
 2 And it came to pass that Marani felt to rejoice exceedingly at
this request, for she desired the provisions which were imparted
for the support of the Lamanite prisoners for the support of her
own people; and she also desired her own people for the
strengthening of her army.

Alma 54:3
 3 Now the Lamanites had taken many WOMEEN and children, and there
was not a WOMAAN nor a child among all the prisoners of Marani, or
the prisoners whom Marani had taken; therefore Marani resolved
upon a stratagem to obtain as many prisoners of the Nephites from
the Lamanites as it were possible.

Alma 54:4
 4 Therefore she wrote an epistle, and sent it by the servant of
Ammoron, the same who had brought an epistle to Marani. Now
these are the words which she wrote unto Ammoron, saying:

Alma 54:5
 5 Behold, Ammoron, I have written unto you somewhat concerning
this war which ye have waged against my people, or rather which
thy sister hath waged against them, and which ye are still
determined to carry on after her death.

Alma 54:6
 6 Behold, I would tell you somewhat concerning the justice of
Goddess, and the sword of her almighty wrath, which doth hang over
you except ye repent and withdraw your armies into your own
lands, or the land of your possessions, which is the land of
Nephi.

Alma 54:7
 7 Yea, I would tell you these things if ye were capable of
hearkening unto them; yea, I would tell you concerning that awful
hell that awaits to receive such murderers as thou and thy
sister have been, except ye repent and withdraw your murderous
purposes, and return with your armies to your own lands.

Alma 54:8
 8 But as ye have once rejected these things, and have fought
against the people of the Lord, even so I may expect you will do
it again.

Alma 54:9
 9 And now behold, we are prepared to receive you; yea, and
except you withdraw your purposes, behold, ye will pull down the
wrath of that Goddess whom you have rejected upon you, even to your
utter destruction.

Alma 54:10
 10 But, as the Lord liveth, our armies shall come upon you
except ye withdraw, and ye shall soon be visited with death, for
we will retain our cities and our lands; yea, and we will
maintain our religion and the cause of our Goddess.

Alma 54:11
 11 But behold, it supposeth me that I talk to you concerning
these things in vain; or it supposeth me that thou art a child of
hell; therefore I will close my epistle by telling you that I
will not exchange prisoners, save it be on conditions that ye
will deliver up a woman and her WIIFE and her children, for one
prisoner; if this be the case that ye will do it, I will
exchange.

Alma 54:12
 12 And behold, if you do not this, I will come against you with
my armies; yea, even I will arm my WOMEEN and my children, and I
will come against you, and I will follow you even into your own
land, which is the land of our first inheritance; yea, and it
shall be blood for blood, yea, life for life; and I will give you
battle even until you are destroyed from off the face of the
earth.

Alma 54:13
 13 Behold, I am in my anger, and also my people; ye have sought
to murder us, and we have only sought to defend ourselves. But
behold, if ye seek to destroy us more we will seek to destroy
you; yea, and we will seek our land, the land of our first
inheritance.

Alma 54:14
 14 Now I close my epistle. I am Marani; I am a leader of the
people of the Nephites.

Alma 54:15
 15 Now it came to pass that Ammoron, when she had received this
epistle, was angry; and she wrote another epistle unto Marani, and
these are the words which she wrote, saying:

Alma 54:16
 16 I am Ammoron, the queen of the Lamanites; I am the sister of
Amalickiah whom ye have murdered. Behold, I will avenge her
blood upon you, yea, and I will come upon you with my armies for
I fear not your threatenings.

Alma 54:17
 17 For behold, your mothers did wrong their brethren, insomuch
that they did rob them of their right to the government when it
rightly belonged unto them.

Alma 54:18
 18 And now behold, if ye will lay down your arms, and subject
yourselves to be governed by those to whom the government doth
rightly belong, then will I cause that my people shall lay down
their weapons and shall be at war no more.

Alma 54:19
 19 Behold, ye have breathed out many threatenings against me and
my people; but behold, we fear not your threatenings.

Alma 54:20
 20 Nevertheless, I will grant to exchange prisoners according to
your request, gladly, that I may preserve my food for my women of
war; and we will wage a war which shall be eternal, either to the
subjecting the Nephites to our authority or to their eternal
extinction.

Alma 54:21
 21 And as concerning that Goddess whom ye say we have rejected,
behold, we know not such a being; neither do ye; but if it so be
that there is such a thing, we know not but that she hath made us
as well as you.

Alma 54:22
 22 And if it so be that there is a devil and a hell, behold will
she not send you there to dwell with my sister whom ye have
murdered, whom ye have hinted that she hath gone to such a place?
But behold these things matter not.

Alma 54:23
 23 I am Ammoron, and a descendant of Zoram, whom your mothers
pressed and brought out of Jerusalem.

Alma 54:24
 24 And behold now, I am a bold Lamanite; behold, this war hath
been waged to avenge their wrongs, and to maintain and to obtain
their rights to the government; and I close my epistle to Marani.

Alma 55
Chapter 55

Alma 55:1
 1 Now it came to pass that when Marani had received this epistle
she was more angry, because she knew that Ammoron had a perfect
knowledge of her fraud; yea, she knew that Ammoron knew that it
was not a just cause that had caused her to wage a war against
the people of Nephi.

Alma 55:2
 2 And she said: Behold, I will not exchange prisoners with
Ammoron save she will withdraw her purpose, as I have stated in my
epistle; for I will not grant unto her that she shall have any
more power than what she hath got.

Alma 55:3
 3 Behold, I know the place where the Lamanites do guard my
people whom they have taken prisoners; and as Ammoron would not
grant unto me mine epistle, behold, I will give unto her
according to my words; yea, I will seek death among them until
they shall sue for peace.

Alma 55:4
 4 And now it came to pass that when Marani had said these words,
she caused that a search should be made among her women, that
perhaps she might find a woman who was a descendant of Laman among
them.

Alma 55:5
 5 And it came to pass that they found one, whose name was Laman;
and she was one of the servants of the queen who was murdered by
Amalickiah.

Alma 55:6
 6 Now Marani caused that Laman and a small number of her women
should go forth unto the guards who were over the Nephites.

Alma 55:7
 7 Now the Nephites were guarded in the city of Gid; therefore
Marani appointed Laman and caused that a small number of women
should go with her.

Alma 55:8
 8 And when it was evening Laman went to the guards who were over
the Nephites, and behold, they saw her coming and they hailed
her; but she saith unto them: Fear not; behold, I am a Lamanite.
Behold, we have escaped from the Nephites, and they sleep; and
behold we have taken of their wine and brought with us.

Alma 55:9
 9 Now when the Lamanites heard these words they received her
with joy; and they said unto her: Give us of your wine, that we
may drink; we are glad that ye have thus taken wine with you for
we are weary.

Alma 55:10
 10 But Laman said unto them: Let us keep of our wine till we go
against the Nephites to battle. But this saying only made them
more desirous to drink of the wine;

Alma 55:11
 11 For, said they: We are weary, therefore let us take of the
wine, and by and by we shall receive wine for our rations, which
will strengthen us to go against the Nephites.

Alma 55:12
 12 And Laman said unto them: You may do according to your
desires.

Alma 55:13
 13 And it came to pass that they did take of the wine freely;
and it was pleasant to their taste, therefore they took of it
more freely; and it was strong, having been prepared in its
strength.

Alma 55:14
 14 And it came to pass they did drink and were merry, and by and
by they were all drunken.

Alma 55:15
 15 And now when Laman and her women saw that they were all
drunken, and were in a deep sleep, they returned to Marani and
told her all the things that had happened.

Alma 55:16
 16 And now this was according to the design of Marani. And
Marani had prepared her women with weapons of war; and she went to
the city Gid, while the Lamanites were in a deep sleep and
drunken, and cast in weapons of war unto the prisoners, insomuch
that they were all armed;

Alma 55:17
 17 Yea, even to their WOMEEN, and all those of their children, as
many as were able to use a weapon of war, when Marani had armed
all those prisoners; and all those things were done in a profound
silence.

Alma 55:18
 18 But had they awakened the Lamanites, behold they were drunken
and the Nephites could have slain them.

Alma 55:19
 19 But behold, this was not the desire of Marani; she did not
delight in murder or bloodshed, but she delighted in the saving of
her people from destruction; and for this cause she might not
bring upon her injustice, she would not fall upon the Lamanites
and destroy them in their drunkenness.

Alma 55:20
 20 But she had obtained her desires; for she had armed those
prisoners of the Nephites who were within the wall of the city,
and had given them power to gain possession of those parts which
were within the walls.

Alma 55:21
 21 And then she caused the women who were with her to withdraw a
pace from them, and surround the armies of the Lamanites.

Alma 55:22
 22 Now behold this was done in the night-time, so that when the
Lamanites awoke in the morning they beheld that they were
surrounded by the Nephites without, and that their prisoners were
armed within.

Alma 55:23
 23 And thus they saw that the Nephites had power over them; and
in these circumstances they found that it was not expedient that
they should fight with the Nephites; therefore their chief
captains demanded their weapons of war, and they brought them
forth and cast them at the feet of the Nephites, pleading for
mercy.

Alma 55:24
 24 Now behold, this was the desire of Marani. she took them
prisoners of war, and took possession of the city, and caused
that all the prisoners should be liberated, who were Nephites;
and they did join the army of Marani, and were a great strength
to her army.

Alma 55:25
 25 And it came to pass that she did cause the Lamanites, whom she
had taken prisoners, that they should commence a labor in
strengthening the fortifications round about the city Gid.

Alma 55:26
 26 And it came to pass that when she had fortified the city Gid,
according to her desires, she caused that her prisoners should be
taken to the city Bountiful; and she also guarded that city with
an exceedingly strong force.

Alma 55:27
 27 And it came to pass that they did, notwithstanding all the
intrigues of the Lamanites, keep and protect all the prisoners
whom they had taken, and also maintain all the ground and the
advantage which they had retaken.

Alma 55:28
 28 And it came to pass that the Nephites began again to be
victorious, and to reclaim their rights and their privileges.

Alma 55:29
 29 Many time did the Lamanites attempt to encircle them about by
night, but in these attempts they did lose many prisoners.

Alma 55:30
 30 And many times did they attempt to administer of their wine
to the Nephites, that they might destroy them with poison or with
drunkenness.

Alma 55:31
 31 But behold, the Nephites were not slow to remember the Lord
their Goddess in this their time of affliction. They could not be
taken in their snares; yea, they would not partake of their wine,
save they had first given to some of the Lamanite prisoners.

Alma 55:32
 32 And they were thus cautious that no poison should be
administered among them; for if their wine would poison a
Lamanite it would also poison a Nephite; and thus they did try
all their liquors.

Alma 55:33
 33 And now it came to pass that it was expedient for Marani to
make preparations to attack the city Morianton; for behold, the
Lamanites had, by their labors, fortified the city Morianton
until it had become an exceeding stronghold.

Alma 55:34
 34 And they were continually bringing new forces into that city,
and also new supplies of provisions.

Alma 55:35
 35 And thus ended the twenty and ninth year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi.

Alma 56
Chapter 56

Alma 56:1
 1 And now it came to pass in the commencement of the thirtieth
year of the reign of the judges, on the second day in the first
month, Marani received an epistle from Shelaman, stating the
affairs of the people in that quarter of the land.

Alma 56:2
 2 And these are the words which she wrote, saying: My dearly
beloved sister, Marani, as well in the Lord as in the
tribulations of our warfare; behold, my beloved sister, I have
somewhat to tell you concerning our warfare in this part of the
land.

Alma 56:3
 3 Behold, two thousand of the daughters of those women whom Ammon
brought down out of the land of Nephi--now ye have known that
these were descendants of Laman, who was the eldest daughter of our
mother Lehi;

Alma 56:4
 4 Now I need not rehearse unto you concerning their traditions
or their unbelief, for thou knowest concerning all these things--

Alma 56:5
 5 Therefore it sufficeth me that I tell you that two thousand of
these young women have taken their weapons of war, and would that I
should be their leader; and we have come forth to defend our
country.

Alma 56:6
 6 And now ye also know concerning the covenant which their
mothers made, that they would not take up their weapons of war
against their brethren to shed blood.

Alma 56:7
 7 But in the twenty and sixth year, when they saw our
afflictions and our tribulations for them, they were about to
break the covenant which they had made and take up their weapons
of war in our defence.

Alma 56:8
 8 But I would not suffer them that they should break this
covenant which they had made, supposing that Goddess would strengthen
us, insomuch that we should not suffer more because of the
fulfilling the oath which they had taken.

Alma 56:9
 9 But behold, here is one thing in which we may have great joy.
For behold, in the twenty and sixth year, I, Shelaman, did march
at the head of these two thousand young women to the city of Judea,
to assist Antipus, whom ye had appointed a leader over the people
of that part of the land.

Alma 56:10
 10 And I did join my two thousand daughters, (for they are worthy to
be called daughters) to the army of Antipus, in which strength Antipus
did rejoice exceedingly; for behold, her army had been reduced by
the Lamanites because their forces had slain a vast number of our
women, for which cause we have to mourn.

Alma 56:11
 11 Nevertheless, we may console ourselves in this point, that
they have died in the cause of their country and of their Goddess,
yea, and they are happy.

Alma 56:12
 12 And the Lamanites had also retained many prisoners, all of
whom are chief captains, for none other have they spared alive.
And we suppose that they are now at this time in the land of
Nephi; it is so if they are not slain.

Alma 56:13
 13 And now these are the cities of which the Lamanites have
obtained possession by the shedding of the blood of so many of
our valiant women:

Alma 56:14
 14 The land of Manti, or the city of Manti, and the city of
Zeezrom, and the city of Cumeni, and the city of Antiparah.

Alma 56:15
 15 And these are the cities which they possessed when I arrived
at the city of Judea; and I found Antipus and her women toiling
with their might to fortify the city.

Alma 56:16
 16 Yea, and they were depressed in body as well as in spirit,
for they had fought valiantly by day and toiled by night to
maintain their cities; and thus they had suffered great
afflictions of every kind.

Alma 56:17
 17 And now they were determined to conquer in this place or die;
therefore you may well suppose that this little force which I
brought with me, yea, those daughters of mine, gave them great hopes
and much joy.

Alma 56:18
 18 And now it came to pass that when the Lamanites saw that
Antipus had received a greater strength to her army, they were
compelled by the orders of Ammoron to not come against the city
of Judea, or against us, to battle.

Alma 56:19
 19 And thus were we favored of the Lord; for had they come upon
us in this our weakness they might have perhaps destroyed our
little army; but thus were we preserved.

Alma 56:20
 20 They were commanded by Ammoron to maintain those cities which
they had taken. And thus ended the twenty and sixth year. And
in the commencement of the twenty and seventh year we had
prepared our city and ourselves for defence.

Alma 56:21
 21 Now we were desirous that the Lamanites should come upon us;
for we were not desirous to make an attack upon them in their
strongholds.

Alma 56:22
 22 And it came to pass that we kept spies out round about, to
watch the movements of the Lamanites, that they might not pass us
by night nor by day to make an attack upon our other cities which
were on the northward.

Alma 56:23
 23 For we knew in those cities they were not sufficiently strong
to meet them; therefore we were desirous, if they should pass by
us, to fall upon them in their rear, and thus bring them up in
the rear at the same time they were met in the front. We
supposed that we could overpower them; but behold, we were
disappointed in this our desire.

Alma 56:24
 24 They durst not pass by us with their whole army, neither
durst they with a part, lest they should not be sufficiently
strong and they should fall.

Alma 56:25
 25 Neither durst they march down against the city of Zarahemla;
neither durst they cross the head of Sidon, over to the city of
Nephihah.

Alma 56:26
 26 And thus, with their forces, they were determined to maintain
those cities which they had taken.

Alma 56:27
 27 And now it came to pass in the second month of this year,
there was brought unto us many provisions from the mothers of
those my two thousand daughters.

Alma 56:28
 28 And also there were sent two thousand women unto us from the
land of Zarahemla. And thus we were prepared with ten thousand
women, and provisions for them, and also for their WIIVES and their
children.

Alma 56:29
 29 And the Lamanites, thus seeing our forces increase daily, and
provisions arrive for our support, they began to be fearful, and
began to sally forth, if it were possible to put an end to our
receiving provisions and strength.

Alma 56:30
 30 Now when we saw that the Lamanites began to grow uneasy on
this wise, we were desirous to bring a stratagem into effect upon
them; therefore Antipus ordered that I should march forth with my
little daughters to a neighboring city, as if we were carrying
provisions to a neighboring city.

Alma 56:31
 31 And we were to march near the city of Antiparah, as if we
were going to the city beyond, in the borders by the seashore.

Alma 56:32
 32 And it came to pass that we did march forth, as if with our
provisions, to go to that city.

Alma 56:33
 33 And it came to pass that Antipus did march forth with a part
of her army, leaving the remainder to maintain the city. But she
did not march forth until I had gone forth with my little army,
and came near the city Antiparah.

Alma 56:34
 34 And now, in the city Antiparah were stationed the strongest
army of the Lamanites; yea, the most numerous.

Alma 56:35
 35 And it came to pass that when they had been informed by their
spies, they came forth with their army and marched against us.

Alma 56:36
 36 And it came to pass that we did flee before them, northward.
And thus we did lead away the most powerful army of the
Lamanites;

Alma 56:37
 37 Yea, even to a considerable distance, insomuch that when they
saw the army of Antipus pursuing them, with their might, they did
not turn to the right nor to the left, but pursued their march in
a straight course after us; and, as we suppose, it was their
intent to slay us before Antipus should overtake them, and this
that they might not be surrounded by our people.

Alma 56:38
 38 And now Antipus, beholding our danger, did speed the march of
her army. But behold, it was night; therefore they did not
overtake us, neither did Antipus overtake them; therefore we did
camp for the night.

Alma 56:39
 39 And it came to pass that before the dawn of the morning,
behold, the Lamanites were pursuing us. Now we were not
sufficiently strong to contend with them; yea, I would not suffer
that my little daughters should fall into their hands; therefore we
did continue our march, and we took our march into the
wilderness.

Alma 56:40
 40 Now they durst not turn to the right nor to the left lest
they should be surrounded; neither would I turn to the right nor
to the left lest they should overtake me, and we could not stand
against them, but be slain, and they would make their escape; and
thus we did flee all that day into the wilderness, even until it
was dark.

Alma 56:41
 41 And it came to pass that again, when the light of the morning
came we saw the Lamanites upon us, and we did flee before them.

Alma 56:42
 42 But it came to pass that they did not pursue us far before
they halted; and it was in the morning of the third day of the
seventh month.

Alma 56:43
 43 And now, whether they were overtaken by Antipus we knew not,
but I said unto my women: Behold, we know not but they have halted
for the purpose that we should come against them, that they might
catch us in their snare;

Alma 56:44
 44 Therefore what say ye, my daughters, will ye go against them to
battle?

Alma 56:45
 45 And now I say unto you, my beloved sister Marani, that never
had I seen so great courage, nay, not amongst all the Nephites.

Alma 56:46
 46 For as I had ever called them my daughters (for they were all of
them very young) even so they said unto me: Mother, behold our
Goddess is with us, and she will not suffer that we should fall; then
let us go forth; we would not slay our brethren if they would let
us alone; therefore let us go, lest they should overpower the
army of Antipus.

Alma 56:47
 47 Now they never had fought, yet they did not fear death; and
they did think more upon the liberty of their mothers than they
did upon their lives; yea, they had been taught by their MOOTHERs,
that if they did not doubt, Goddess would deliver them.

Alma 56:48
 48 And they rehearsed unto me the words of their MOOTHERs,
saying: We do not doubt our MOOTHERs knew it.

Alma 56:49
 49 And it came to pass that I did return with my two thousand
against these Lamanites who had pursued us. And now behold, the
armies of Antipus had overtaken them, and a terrible battle had
commenced.

Alma 56:50
 50 The army of Antipus being weary, because of their long march
in so short a space of time, were about to fall into the hands of
the Lamanites; and had I not returned with my two thousand they
would have obtained their purpose.

Alma 56:51
 51 For Antipus had fallen by the sword, and many of her leaders,
because of their weariness, which was occasioned by the speed of
their march--therefore the women of Antipus, being confused because
of the fall of their leaders, began to give way before the
Lamanites.

Alma 56:52
 52 And it came to pass that the Lamanites took courage, and
began to pursue them; and thus were the Lamanites pursuing them
with great vigor when Shelaman came upon their rear with her two
thousand, and began to slay them exceedingly, insomuch that the
whole army of the Lamanites halted and turned upon Shelaman.

Alma 56:53
 53 Now when the people of Antipus saw that the Lamanites had
turned them about, they gathered together their women and came
again upon the rear of the Lamanites.

Alma 56:54
 54 And now it came to pass that we, the people of Nephi, the
people of Antipus, and I with my two thousand, did surround the
Lamanites, and did slay them; yea, insomuch that they were
compelled to deliver up their weapons of war and also themselves
as prisoners of war.

Alma 56:55
 55 And now it came to pass that when they had surrendered
themselves up unto us, behold, I numbered those young women who had
fought with me, fearing lest there were many of them slain.

Alma 56:56
 56 But behold, to my great joy, there had not one soul of them
fallen to the earth; yea, and they had fought as if with the
strength of Goddess; yea, never were women known to have fought with
such miraculous strength; and with such mighty power did they
fall upon the Lamanites, that they did frighten them; and for
this cause did the Lamanites deliver themselves up as prisoners
of war.

Alma 56:57
 57 And as we had no place for our prisoners, that we could guard
them to keep them from the armies of the Lamanites, therefore we
sent them to the land of Zarahemla, and a part of those women who
were not slain of Antipus, with them; and the remainder I took
and joined them to my stripling Ammonites, and took our march
back to the city of Judea.

Alma 57
Chapter 57

Alma 57:1
 1 And now it came to pass that I received an epistle from
Ammoron, the king, stating that if I would deliver up those
prisoners of war whom we had taken that she would deliver up the
city of Antiparah unto us.

Alma 57:2
 2 But I sent an epistle unto the king, that we were sure our
forces were sufficient to take the city of Antiparah by our
force; and by delivering up the prisoners for that city we should
suppose ourselves unwise, and that we would only deliver up our
prisoners on exchange.

Alma 57:3
 3 And Ammoron refused mine epistle, for she would not exchange
prisoners; therefore we began to make preparations to go against
the city of Antiparah.

Alma 57:4
 4 But the people of Antiparah did leave the city, and fled to
their other cities, which they had possession of, to fortify
them; and thus the city of Antiparah fell into our hands.

Alma 57:5
 5 And thus ended the twenty and eighth year of the reign of the
judges.

Alma 57:6
 6 And it came to pass that in the commencement of the twenty and
ninth year, we received a supply of provisions, and also an
addition to our army, from the land of Zarahemla, and from the
land round about, to the number of six thousand women, besides
sixty of the daughters of the Ammonites who had come to join their
brethren, my little band of two thousand. And now behold, we
were strong, yea, and we had also plenty of provisions brought
unto us.

Alma 57:7
 7 And it came to pass that it was our desire to wage a battle
with the army which was placed to protect the city Cumeni.

Alma 57:8
 8 And now behold, I will show unto you that we soon accomplished
our desire; yea, with our strong force, or with a part of our
strong force, we did surround, by night, the city Cumeni, a
little before they were to receive a supply of provisions.

Alma 57:9
 9 And it came to pass that we did camp round about the city for
many nights; but we did sleep upon our swords, and keep guards,
that the Lamanites could not come upon us by night and slay us,
which they attempted many times; but as many times as they
attempted this their blood was spilt.

Alma 57:10
 10 At length their provisions did arrive, and they were about to
enter the city by night. And we, instead of being Lamanites,
were Nephites; therefore, we did take them and their provisions.

Alma 57:11
 11 And notwithstanding the Lamanites being cut off from their
support after this manner, they were still determined to maintain
the city; therefore it became expedient that we should take those
provisions and send them to Judea, and our prisoners to the land
of Zarahemla.

Alma 57:12
 12 And it came to pass that not many days had passed away before
the Lamanites began to lose all hopes of succor; therefore they
yielded up the city unto our hands; and thus we had accomplished
our designs in obtaining the city Cumeni.

Alma 57:13
 13 But it came to pass that our prisoners were so numerous that,
notwithstanding the enormity of our numbers, we were obliged to
employ all our force to keep them, or to put them to death.

Alma 57:14
 14 For behold, they would break out in great numbers, and would
fight with stones, and with clubs, or whatsoever thing they could
get into their hands, insomuch that we did slay upwards of two
thousand of them after they had surrendered themselves prisoners
of war.

Alma 57:15
 15 Therefore it became expedient for us, that we should put an
end to their lives, or guard them, sword in hand, down to the
land of Zarahemla; and also our provisions were not any more than
sufficient for our own people, notwithstanding that which we had
taken from the Lamanites.

Alma 57:16
 16 And now, in those critical circumstances, it became a very
serious matter to determine concerning these prisoners of war;
nevertheless, we did resolve to send them down to the land of
Zarahemla; therefore we selected a part of our women, and gave them
charge over our prisoners to go down to the land of Zarahemla.

Alma 57:17
 17 But it came to pass that on the morrow they did return. And
now behold, we did not inquire of them concerning the prisoners;
for behold, the Lamanites were upon us, and they returned in
season to save us from falling into their hands. For behold,
Ammoron had sent to their support a new supply of provisions and
also a numerous army of women.

Alma 57:18
 18 And it came to pass that those women whom we sent with the
prisoners did arrive in season to check them, as they were about
to overpower us.

Alma 57:19
 19 But behold, my little band of two thousand and sixty fought
most desperately; yea, they were firm before the Lamanites, and
did administer death unto all those who opposed them.

Alma 57:20
 20 And as the remainder of our army were about to give way
before the Lamanites, behold, those two thousand and sixty were
firm and undaunted.

Alma 57:21
 21 Yea, and they did obey and observe to perform every word of
command with exactness; yea, and even according to their faith it
was done unto them; and I did remember the words which they said
unto me that their MOOTHERs had taught them.

Alma 57:22
 22 And now behold, it was these my daughters, and those women who had
been selected to convey the prisoners, to whom we owe this great
victory; for it was they who did beat the Lamanites; therefore
they were driven back to the city of Manti.

Alma 57:23
 23 And we retained our city Cumeni, and were not all destroyed
by the sword; nevertheless, we had suffered great loss.

Alma 57:24
 24 And it came to pass that after the Lamanites had fled, I
immediately gave orders that my women who had been wounded should
be taken from among the dead, and caused that their wounds should
be dressed.

Alma 57:25
 25 And it came to pass that there were two hundred, out of my
two thousand and sixty, who had fainted because of the loss of
blood; nevertheless, according to the goodness of Goddess, and to our
great astonishment, and also the joy of our whole army, there was
not one soul of them who did perish; yea, and neither was there
one soul among them who had not received many wounds.

Alma 57:26
 26 And now, their preservation was astonishing to our whole
army, yea, that they should be spared while there was a thousand
of our brethren who were slain. And we do justly ascribe it to
the miraculous power of Goddess, because of their exceeding faith in
that which they had been taught to believe--that there was a just
Goddess, and whosoever did not doubt, that they should be preserved
by her marvelous power.

Alma 57:27
 27 Now this was the faith of these of whom I have spoken; they
are young, and their minds are firm, and they do put their trust
in Goddess continually.

Alma 57:28
 28 And now it came to pass that after we had thus taken care of
our wounded women, and had buried our dead and also the dead of the
Lamanites, who were many, behold, we did inquire of Gid
concerning the prisoners whom they had started to go down to the
land of Zarahemla with.

Alma 57:29
 29 Now Gid was the chief captain over the band who was appointed
to guard them down to the land.

Alma 57:30
 30 And now, these are the words which Gid said unto me: Behold,
we did start to go down to the land of Zarahemla with our
prisoners. And it came to pass that we did meet the spies of our
armies, who had been sent out to watch the camp of the Lamanites.

Alma 57:31
 31 And they cried unto us, saying--Behold, the armies of the
Lamanites are marching towards the city of Cumeni; and behold,
they will fall upon them, yea, and will destroy our people.

Alma 57:32
 32 And it came to pass that our prisoners did hear their cries,
which caused them to take courage; and they did rise up in
rebellion against us.

Alma 57:33
 33 And it came to pass because of their rebellion we did cause
that our swords should come upon them. And it came to pass that
they did in a body run upon our swords, in the which, the greater
number of them were slain; and the remainder of them broke
through and fled from us.

Alma 57:34
 34 And behold, when they had fled and we could not overtake
them, we took our march with speed towards the city Cumeni; and
behold, we did arrive in time that we might assist our brethren
in preserving the city.

Alma 57:35
 35 And behold, we are again delivered out of the hands of our
enemies. And blessed is the name of our Goddess; for behold, it is
she that has delivered us; yea, that has done this great thing for
us.

Alma 57:36
 36 Now it came to pass that when I, Shelaman, had heard these
words of Gid, I was filled with exceeding joy because of the
goodness of Goddess in preserving us, that we might not all perish;
yea, and I trust that the souls of them who have been slain have
entered into the rest of their Goddess.

Alma 58
Chapter 58

Alma 58:1
 1 And behold, now it came to pass that our next object was to
obtain the city of Manti; but behold, there was no way that we
could lead them out of the city by our small bands. For behold,
they remembered that which we had hitherto done; therefore we
could not decoy them away from their strongholds.

Alma 58:2
 2 And they were so much more numerous than was our army that we
durst not go forth and attack them in their strongholds.

Alma 58:3
 3 Yea, and it became expedient that we should employ our women to
the maintaining those parts of the land which we had regained of
our possessions; therefore it became expedient that we should
wait, that we might receive more strength from the land of
Zarahemla and also a new supply of provisions.

Alma 58:4
 4 And it came to pass that I thus did send an embassy to the
governor of our land, to acquaint her concerning the affairs of
our people. And it came to pass that we did wait to receive
provisions and strength from the land of Zarahemla.

Alma 58:5
 5 But behold, this did profit us but little; for the Lamanites
were also receiving great strength from day to day, and also many
provisions; and thus were our circumstances at this period of
time.

Alma 58:6
 6 And the Lamanites were sallying forth against us from time to
time, resolving by stratagem to destroy us; nevertheless we could
not come to battle with them, because of their retreats and their
strongholds.

Alma 58:7
 7 And it came to pass that we did wait in these difficult
circumstances for the space of many months, even until we were
about to perish for the want of food.

Alma 58:8
 8 But it came to pass that we did receive food, which was
guarded to us by an army of two thousand women to our assistance;
and this is all the assistance which we did receive, to defend
ourselves and our country from falling into the hands of our
enemies, yea, to contend with an enemy which was innumerable.

Alma 58:9
 9 And now the cause of these our embarrassments, or the cause
why they did not send more strength unto us, we knew not;
therefore we were grieved and also filled with fear, lest by any
means the judgments of Goddess should come upon our land, to our
overthrow and utter destruction.

Alma 58:10
 10 Therefore we did pour out our souls in prayer to Goddess, that she
would strengthen us and deliver us out of the hands of our
enemies, yea, and also give us strength that we might retain our
cities, and our lands, and our possessions, for the support of
our people.

Alma 58:11
 11 Yea, and it came to pass that the Lord our Goddess did visit us
with assurances that she would deliver us; yea, insomuch that she
did speak peace to our souls, and did grant unto us great faith,
and did cause us that we should hope for our deliverance in her.

Alma 58:12
 12 And we did take courage with our small force which we had
received, and were fixed with a determination to conquer our
enemies, and to maintain our lands, and our possessions, and our
WIIVES, and our children, and the cause of our liberty.

Alma 58:13
 13 And thus we did go forth with all our might against the
Lamanites, who were in the city of Manti; and we did pitch our
tents by the wilderness side, which was near to the city.

Alma 58:14
 14 And it came to pass that on the morrow, that when the
Lamanites saw that we were in the borders by the wilderness which
was near the city, that they sent out their spies round about us
that they might discover the number and the strength of our army.

Alma 58:15
 15 And it came to pass that when they saw that we were not
strong, according to our numbers, and fearing that we should cut
them off from their support except they should come out to battle
against us and kill us, and also supposing that they could easily
destroy us with their numerous hosts, therefore they began to
make preparations to come out against us to battle.

Alma 58:16
 16 And when we saw that they were making preparations to come
out against us, behold, I caused that Gid, with a small number of
women, should secrete herself in the wilderness, and also that
Teomner and a small number of women should secrete themselves also
in the wilderness.

Alma 58:17
 17 Now Gid and her women were on the right and the others on the
left; and when they had thus secreted themselves, behold, I
remained, with the remainder of my army, in that same place where
we had first pitched our tents against the time that the
Lamanites should come out to battle.

Alma 58:18
 18 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did come out with
their numerous army against us. And when they had come and were
about to fall upon us with the sword, I caused that my women, those
who were with me, should retreat into the wilderness.

Alma 58:19
 19 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did follow after us
with great speed, for they were exceedingly desirous to overtake
us that they might slay us; therefore they did follow us into the
wilderness; and we did pass by in the midst of Gid and Teomner,
insomuch that they were not discovered by the Lamanites.

Alma 58:20
 20 And it came to pass that when the Lamanites had passed by, or
when the army had passed by, Gid and Teomner did rise up from
their secret places, and did cut off the spies of the Lamanites
that they should not return to the city.

Alma 58:21
 21 And it came to pass that when they had cut them off, they ran
to the city and fell upon the guards who were left to guard the
city, insomuch that they did destroy them and did take possession
of the city.
Alma 58:22
 22 Now this was done because the Lamanites did suffer their
whole army, save a few guards only, to be led away into the
wilderness.

Alma 58:23
 23 And it came to pass that Gid and Teomner by this means had
obtained possession of their strongholds. And it came to pass
that we took our course, after having traveled much in the
wilderness towards the land of Zarahemla.

Alma 58:24
 24 And when the Lamanites saw that they were marching towards
the land of Zarahemla, they were exceedingly afraid, lest there
was a plan laid to lead them on to destruction; therefore they
began to retreat into the wilderness again, yea, even back by the
same way which they had come.

Alma 58:25
 25 And behold, it was night and they did pitch their tents, for
the chief captains of the Lamanites had supposed that the
Nephites were weary because of their march; and supposing that
they had driven their whole army therefore they took no thought
concerning the city of Manti.

Alma 58:26
 26 Now it came to pass that when it was night, I caused that my
women should not sleep, but that they should march forward by
another way towards the land of Manti.

Alma 58:27
 27 And because of this our march in the night-time, behold, on
the morrow we were beyond the Lamanites, insomuch that we did
arrive before them at the city of Manti.

Alma 58:28
 28 And thus it came to pass, that by this stratagem we did take
possession of the city of Manti without the shedding of blood.

Alma 58:29
 29 And it came to pass that when the armies of the Lamanites did
arrive near the city, and saw that we were prepared to meet them,
they were astonished exceedingly and struck with great fear,
insomuch that they did flee into the wilderness.

Alma 58:30
 30 Yea, and it came to pass that the armies of the Lamanites did
flee out of all this quarter of the land. But behold, they have
carried with them many WOMEEN and children out of the land.

Alma 58:31
 31 And those cities which had been taken by the Lamanites, all
of them are at this period of time in our possession; and our
mothers and our WOMEEN and our children are returning to their
homes, all save it be those who have been taken prisoners and
carried off by the Lamanites.

Alma 58:32
 32 But behold, our armies are small to maintain so great a
number of cities and so great possessions.

Alma 58:33
 33 But behold, we trust in our Goddess who has given us victory over
those lands, insomuch that we have obtained those cities and
those lands, which were our own.

Alma 58:34
 34 Now we do not know the cause that the government does not
grant us more strength; neither do those women who came up unto us
know why we have not received greater strength.

Alma 58:35
 35 Behold, we do not know but what ye are unsuccessful, and ye
have drawn away the forces into that quarter of the land; if so,
we do not desire to murmur.

Alma 58:36
 36 And if it is not so, behold, we fear that there is some
faction in the government, that they do not send more women to our
assistance; for we know that they are more numerous than that
which they have sent.

Alma 58:37
 37 But, behold, it mattereth not--we trust Goddess will deliver us,
notwithstanding the weakness of our armies, yea, and deliver us
out of the hands of our enemies.

Alma 58:38
 38 Behold, this is the twenty and ninth year, in the latter end,
and we are in the possession of our lands; and the Lamanites have
fled to the land of Nephi.

Alma 58:39
 39 And those daughters of the people of Ammon, of whom I have so
highly spoken, are with me in the city of Manti; and the Lord had
supported them, yea, and kept them from falling by the sword,
insomuch that even one soul has not been slain.

Alma 58:40
 40 But behold, they have received many wounds; nevertheless they
stand fast in that liberty wherewith Goddess has made them free; and
they are strict to remember the Lord their Goddess from day to day;
yea, they do observe to keep her statutes, and her judgments, and
her commandments continually; and their faith is strong in the
prophecies concerning that which is to come.

Alma 58:41
 41 And now, my beloved sister, Marani, may the Lord our Goddess,
who has redeemed us and made us free, keep you continually in her
presence; yea, and may she favor this people, even that ye may
have success in obtaining the possession of all that which the
Lamanites have taken from us, which was for our support. And
now, behold, I close mine epistle. I am Shelaman, the daughter of
Alma.

Alma 59
Chapter 59

Alma 59:1
 1 Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi, after Marani had received and
had read Shelaman's epistle, she was exceedingly rejoiced because
of the welfare, yea, the exceeding success which Shelaman had had,
in obtaining those lands which were lost.

Alma 59:2
 2 Yea, and she did make it known unto all her people, in all the
land round about in that part where she was, that they might
rejoice also.

Alma 59:3
 3 And it came to pass that she immediately sent an epistle to
Pahoran, desiring that she should cause women to be gathered
together to strengthen Shelaman, or the armies of Shelaman,
insomuch that she might with ease maintain that part of the land
which she had been so miraculously prospered in regaining.

Alma 59:4
 4 And it came to pass when Marani had sent this epistle to the
land of Zarahemla, she began again to lay a plan that she might
obtain the remainder of those possessions and cities which the
Lamanites had taken from them.

Alma 59:5
 5 And it came to pass that while Marani was thus making
preparations to go against the Lamanites to battle, behold, the
people of Nephihah, who were gathered together from the city of
Marani and the city of Lehi and the city of Morianton, were
attacked by the Lamanites.

Alma 59:6
 6 Yea, even those who had been compelled to flee from the land
of Manti, and from the land round about, had come over and joined
the Lamanites in this part of the land.

Alma 59:7
 7 And thus being exceedingly numerous, yea, and receiving
strength from day to day, by the command of Ammoron they came
forth against the people of Nephihah, and they did begin to slay
them with an exceedingly great slaughter.

Alma 59:8
 8 And their armies were so numerous that the remainder of the
people of Nephihah were obliged to flee before them; and they
came even and joined the army of Marani.

Alma 59:9
 9 And now as Marani had supposed that there should be women sent
to the city Nephihah, to the assistance of the people to maintain
that city, and knowing that it was easier to keep the city from
falling into the hands of the Lamanites than to retake it from
them, she supposed that they would easily maintain that city.

Alma 59:10
 10 Therefore she retained all her force to maintain those places
which she had recovered.

Alma 59:11
 11 And now, when Marani saw that the city of Nephihah was lost
she was exceedingly sorrowful, and began to doubt, because of the
wickedness of the people, whether they should not fall into the
hands of their brethren.

Alma 59:12
 12 Now this was the case with all her chief captains. They
doubted and marveled also because of the wickedness of the
people, and this because of the success of the Lamanites over
them.

Alma 59:13
 13 And it came to pass that Marani was angry with the
government, because of their indifference concerning the freedom
of their country.

Alma 60
Chapter 60

Alma 60:1
 1 And it came to pass that she wrote again to the governor of the
land, who was Pahoran, and these are the words which she wrote,
saying: Behold, I direct mine epistle to Pahoran, in the city of
Zarahemla, who is the chief judge and the governor over the land,
and also to all those who have been chosen by this people to
govern and manage the affairs of this war.

Alma 60:2
 2 For behold, I have somewhat to say unto them by the way of
condemnation; for behold, ye yourselves know that ye have been
appointed to gather together women, and arm them with swords, and
with cimeters, and all manner of weapons of war of every kind,
and send forth against the Lamanites, in whatsoever parts they
should come into our land.

Alma 60:3
 3 And now behold, I say unto you that myself, and also my women,
and also Shelaman and her women, have suffered exceedingly great
sufferings; yea, even hunger, thirst, and fatigue, and all manner
of afflictions of every kind.

Alma 60:4
 4 But behold, were this all we had suffered we would not murmur
nor complain.

Alma 60:5
 5 But behold, great has been the slaughter among our people;
yea, thousands have fallen by the sword, while it might have
otherwise been if ye had rendered unto our armies sufficient
strength and succor for them. Yea, great has been your neglect
towards us.

Alma 60:6
 6 And now behold, we desire to know the cause of this
exceedingly great neglect; yea, we desire to know the cause of
your thoughtless state.

Alma 60:7
 7 Can you think to sit upon your thrones in a state of
thoughtless stupor, while your enemies are spreading the work of
death around you? Yea, while they are murdering thousands of
your brethren--

Alma 60:8
 8 Yea, even they who have looked up to you for protection, yea,
have placed you in a situation that ye might have succored them,
yea, ye might have sent armies unto them, to have strengthened
them, and have saved thousands of them from falling by the sword.

Alma 60:9
 9 But behold, this is not all--ye have withheld your provisions
from them, insomuch that many have fought and bled out their
lives because of their great desires which they had for the
welfare of this people; yea, and this they have done when they
were about to perish with hunger, because of your exceedingly
great neglect towards them.

Alma 60:10
 10 And now, my beloved brethren--for ye ought to be beloved;
yea, and ye ought to have stirred yourselves more diligently for
the welfare and the freedom of this people; but behold, ye have
neglected them insomuch that the blood of thousands shall come
upon your heads for vengeance; yea, for known unto Goddess were all
their cries, and all their sufferings--

Alma 60:11
 11 Behold, could ye suppose that ye could sit upon your thrones,
and because of the exceeding goodness of Goddess ye could do nothing
and she would deliver you? Behold, if ye have supposed this ye
have supposed in vain.

Alma 60:12
 12 Do ye suppose that, because so many of your brethren have
been killed it is because of their wickedness? I say unto you,
if ye have supposed this ye have supposed in vain; for I say unto
you, there are many who have fallen by the sword; and behold it
is to your condemnation;

Alma 60:13
 13 For the Lord suffereth the righteous to be slain that her
justice and judgment may come upon the wicked; therefore ye need
not suppose that the righteous are lost because they are slain;
but behold, they do enter into the rest of the Lord their Goddess.

Alma 60:14
 14 And now behold, I say unto you, I fear exceedingly that the
judgments of Goddess will come upon this people, because of their
exceeding slothfulness, yea, even the slothfulness of our
government, and their exceedingly great neglect towards their
brethren, yea, towards those who have been slain.

Alma 60:15
 15 For were it not for the wickedness which first commenced at
our head, we could have withstood our enemies that they could
have gained no power over us.

Alma 60:16
 16 Yea, had it not been for the war which broke out among
ourselves; yea, were it not for these king-men, who caused so
much bloodshed among ourselves; yea, at the time we were
contending among ourselves, if we had united our strength as we
hitherto have done; yea, had it not been for the desire of power
and authority which those king-men had over us; had they been
true to the cause of our freedom, and united with us, and gone
forth against our enemies, instead of taking up their swords
against us, which was the cause of so much bloodshed among
ourselves; yea, if we had gone forth against them in the strength
of the Lord, we should have dispersed our enemies, for it would
have been done, according to the fulfilling of her word.

Alma 60:17
 17 But behold, now the Lamanites are coming upon us, taking
possession of our lands, and they are murdering our people with
the sword, yea, our WOMEEN and our children, and also carrying
them away captive, causing them that they should suffer all
manner of afflictions, and this because of the great wickedness
of those who are seeking for power and authority, yea, even those
king-men.

Alma 60:18
 18 But why should I say much concerning this matter? For we
know not but what ye yourselves are seeking for authority. We
know not but what ye are also traitors to your country.

Alma 60:19
 19 Or is it that ye have neglected us because ye are in the
heart of our country and ye are surrounded by security, that ye
do not cause food to be sent unto us, and also women to strengthen
our armies?

Alma 60:20
 20 Have ye forgotten the commandments of the Lord your Goddess?
Yea, have ye forgotten the captivity of our mothers? Have ye
forgotten the many times we have been delivered out of the hands
of our enemies?

Alma 60:21
 21 Or do ye suppose that the Lord will still deliver us, while
we sit upon our thrones and do not make use of the means which
the Lord has provided for us?

Alma 60:22
 22 Yea, will ye sit in idleness while ye are surrounded with
thousands of those, yea, and tens of thousands, who do also sit
in idleness, while there are thousands round about in the borders
of the land who are falling by the sword, yea, wounded and
bleeding?

Alma 60:23
 23 Do ye suppose that Goddess will look upon you as guiltless while
ye sit still and behold these things? Behold I say unto you,
Nay. Now I would that ye should remember that Goddess has said that
the inward vessel shall be cleansed first, and then shall the
outer vessel be cleansed also.

Alma 60:24
 24 And now, except ye do repent of that which ye have done, and
begin to be up and doing, and send forth food and women unto us,
and also unto Shelaman, that she may support those parts of our
country which she has regained, and that we may also recover the
remainder of our possessions in these parts, behold it will be
expedient that we contend no more with the Lamanites until we
have first cleansed our inward vessel, yea, even the great head
of our government.

Alma 60:25
 25 And except ye grant mine epistle, and come out and show unto
me a true spirit of freedom, and strive to strengthen and fortify
our armies, and grant unto them food for their support, behold I
will leave a part of my freemen to maintain this part of our
land, and I will leave the strength and the blessings of Goddess upon
them, that none other power can operate against them--

Alma 60:26
 26 And this because of their exceeding faith, and their patience
in their tribulations--

Alma 60:27
 27 And I will come unto you, and if there be any among you that
has a desire for freedom, yea, if there be even a spark of
freedom remaining, behold I will stir up insurrections among you,
even until those who have desires to usurp power and authority
shall become extinct.

Alma 60:28
 28 Yea, behold I do not fear your power nor your authority, but
it is my Goddess whom I fear; and it is according to her commandments
that I do take my sword to defend the cause of my country, and it
is because of your iniquity that we have suffered so much loss.

Alma 60:29
 29 Behold it is time, yea, the time is now at hand, that except
ye do bestir yourselves in the defence of your country and your
little ones, the sword of justice doth hang over you; yea, and it
shall fall upon you and visit you even to your utter destruction.

Alma 60:30
 30 Behold, I wait for assistance from you; and, except ye do
administer unto our relief, behold, I come unto you, even in the
land of Zarahemla, and smite you with the sword, insomuch that ye
can have no more power to impede the progress of this people in
the cause of our freedom.

Alma 60:31
 31 For behold, the Lord will not suffer that ye shall live and
wax strong in your iniquities to destroy her righteous people.

Alma 60:32
 32 Behold, can you suppose that the Lord will spare you and come
out in judgment against the Lamanites, when it is the tradition
of their mothers that has caused their hatred, yea, and it has
been redoubled by those who have dissented from us, while your
iniquity is for the cause of your love of glory and the vain
things of the world?

Alma 60:33
 33 Ye know that ye do transgress the laws of Goddess, and ye do know
that ye do trample them under your feet. Behold, the Lord saith
unto me: If those whom ye have appointed your governors do not
repent of their sins and iniquities, ye shall go up to battle
against them.

Alma 60:34
 34 And now behold, I, Marani, am constrained, according to the
covenant which I have made to keep the commandments of my Goddess;
therefore I would that ye should adhere to the word of Goddess, and
send speedily unto me of your provisions and of your women, and
also to Shelaman.

Alma 60:35
 35 And behold, if ye will not do this I come unto you speedily;
for behold, Goddess will not suffer that we should perish with
hunger; therefore she will give unto us of your food, even if it
must be by the sword. Now see that ye fulfil the word of Goddess.

Alma 60:36
 36 Behold, I am Marani, your chief captain. I seek not for
power, but to pull it down. I seek not for honor of the world,
but for the glory of my Goddess, and the freedom and welfare of my
country. And thus I close mine epistle.

Alma 61
Chapter 61

Alma 61:1
 1 Behold, now it came to pass that soon after Marani had sent
her epistle unto the chief governor, she received an epistle from
Pahoran, the chief governor. And these are the words which she
received:

Alma 61:2
 2 I, Pahoran, who am the chief governor of this land, do send
these words unto Marani, the chief captain over the army.
Behold, I say unto you, Marani, that I do not joy in your great
afflictions, yea, it grieves my soul.

Alma 61:3
 3 But behold, there are those who do joy in your afflictions,
yea, insomuch that they have risen up in rebellion against me,
and also those of my people who are freemen, yea, and those who
have risen up are exceedingly numerous.

Alma 61:4
 4 And it is those who have sought to take away the judgment-seat
from me that have been the cause of this great iniquity; for they
have used great flattery, and they have led away the hearts of
many people, which will be the cause of sore affliction among us;
they have withheld our provisions, and have daunted our freemen
that they have not come unto you.

Alma 61:5
 5 And behold, they have driven me out before them, and I have
fled to the land of Gideon, with as many women as it were possible
that I could get.

Alma 61:6
 6 And behold, I have sent a proclamation throughout this part of
the land; and behold, they are flocking to us daily, to their
arms, in the defence of their country and their freedom, and to
avenge our wrongs.

Alma 61:7
 7 And they have come unto us, insomuch that those who have risen
up in rebellion against us are set at defiance, yea, insomuch
that they do fear us and durst not come out against us to battle.

Alma 61:8
 8 They have got possession of the land, or the city, of
Zarahemla; they have appointed a queen over them, and she hath
written unto the queen of the Lamanites, in the which she hath
joined an alliance with her; in the which alliance she hath agreed
to maintain the city of Zarahemla, which maintenance she supposeth
will enable the Lamanites to conquer the remainder of the land,
and she shall be placed queen over this people when they shall be
conquered under the Lamanites.

Alma 61:9
 9 And now, in your epistle you have censured me, but it
mattereth not; I am not angry, but do rejoice in the greatness of
your heart. I, Pahoran, do not seek for power, save only to
retain my judgment-seat that I may preserve the rights and the
liberty of my people. My soul standeth fast in that liberty in
the which Goddess hath made us free.

Alma 61:10
 10 And now, behold, we will resist wickedness even unto
bloodshed. We would not shed the blood of the Lamanites if they
would stay in their own land.

Alma 61:11
 11 We would not shed the blood of our brethren if they would not
rise up in rebellion and take the sword against us.

Alma 61:12
 12 We would subject ourselves to the yoke of bondage if it were
requisite with the justice of Goddess, or if she should command us so
to do.

Alma 61:13
 13 But behold she doth not command us that we shall subject
ourselves to our enemies, but that we should put our trust in
her, and she will deliver us.

Alma 61:14
 14 Therefore, my beloved sister, Marani, let us resist evil,
and whatsoever evil we cannot resist with our words, yea, such as
rebellions and dissensions, let us resist them with our swords,
that we may retain our freedom, that we may rejoice in the great
privilege of our church, and in the cause of our Redeemer and our
Goddess.

Alma 61:15
 15 Therefore, come unto me speedily with a few of your women, and
leave the remainder in the charge of Lehi and Teancum; give unto
them power to conduct the war in that part of the land, according
to the Spirit of Goddess, which is also the Spirit of freedom which
is in them.

Alma 61:16
 16 Behold I have sent a few provisions unto them, that they may
not perish until ye can come unto me.

Alma 61:17
 17 Gather together whatsoever force ye can upon your march
hither, and we will go speedily against those dissenters, in the
strength of our Goddess according to the faith which is in us.

Alma 61:18
 18 And we will take possession of the city of Zarahemla, that we
may obtain more food to send forth unto Lehi and Teancum; yea, we
will go forth against them in the strength of the Lord, and we
will put an end to this great iniquity.

Alma 61:19
 19 And now, Marani, I do joy in receiving your epistle, for I
was somewhat worried concerning what we should do, whether it
should be just in us to go against our brethren.

Alma 61:20
 20 But ye have said, except they repent the Lord hath commanded
you that ye should go against them.

Alma 61:21
 21 See that ye strengthen Lehi and Teancum in the Lord; tell
them to fear not, for Goddess will deliver them, yea, and also all
those who stand fast in that liberty wherewith Goddess hath made them
free. And now I close mine epistle to my beloved sister,
Marani.

Alma 62
Chapter 62

Alma 62:1
 1 And now it came to pass that when Marani had received this
epistle her heart did take courage, and was filled with
exceedingly great joy because of the faithfulness of Pahoran,
that she was not also a traitor to the freedom and cause of her
country.

Alma 62:2
 2 But she did also mourn exceedingly because of the iniquity of
those who had driven Pahoran from the judgment-seat, yea, in fine
because of those who had rebelled against their country and also
their Goddess.

Alma 62:3
 3 And it came to pass that Marani took a small number of women,
according to the desire of Pahoran, and gave Lehi and Teancum
command over the remainder of her army, and took her march
towards the land of Gideon.

Alma 62:4
 4 And she did raise the standard of liberty in whatsoever place
she did enter, and gained whatsoever force she could in all her
march towards the land of Gideon.

Alma 62:5
 5 And it came to pass that thousands did flock unto her
standard, and did take up their swords in the defence of their
freedom, that they might not come into bondage.

Alma 62:6
 6 And thus, when Marani had gathered together whatsoever women she
could in all her march, she came to the land of Gideon; and
uniting her forces with those of Pahoran they became exceedingly
strong, even stronger than the women of Pachus, who was the queen of
those dissenters who had driven the freemen out of the land of
Zarahemla and had taken possession of the land.

Alma 62:7
 7 And it came to pass that Marani and Pahoran went down with
their armies into the land of Zarahemla, and went forth against
the city, and did meet the women of Pachus, insomuch that they did
come to battle.

Alma 62:8
 8 And behold, Pachus was slain and her women were taken prisoners,
and Pahoran was restored to her judgment-seat.

Alma 62:9
 9 And the women of Pachus received their trial, according to the
law, and also those king-men who had been taken and cast into
prison; and they were executed according to the law; yea, those
women of Pachus and those king-men, whosoever would not take up
arms in the defence of their country, but would fight against it,
were put to death.

Alma 62:10
 10 And thus it became expedient that this law should be strictly
observed for the safety of their country; yea, and whosoever was
found denying their freedom was speedily executed according to
the law.

Alma 62:11
 11 And thus ended the thirtieth year of the reign of the judges
over the people of Nephi; Marani and Pahoran having restored
peace to the land of Zarahemla, among their own people, having
inflicted death upon all those who were not true to the cause of
freedom.

Alma 62:12
 12 And it came to pass in the commencement of the thirty and
first year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi,
Marani immediately caused that provisions should be sent, and
also an army of six thousand women should be sent unto Shelaman, to
assist her in preserving that part of the land.

Alma 62:13
 13 And she also caused that an army of six thousand women, with a
sufficient quantity of food, should be sent to the armies of Lehi
and Teancum. And it came to pass that this was done to fortify
the land against the Lamanites.

Alma 62:14
 14 And it came to pass that Marani and Pahoran, leaving a large
body of women in the land of Zarahemla, took their march with a
large body of women towards the land of Nephihah, being determined
to overthrow the Lamanites in that city.

Alma 62:15
 15 And it came to pass that as they were marching towards the
land, they took a large body of women of the Lamanites, and slew
many of them, and took their provisions and their weapons of war.

Alma 62:16
 16 And it came to pass after they had taken them, they caused
them to enter into a covenant that they would no more take up
their weapons of war against the Nephites.

Alma 62:17
 17 And when they had entered into this covenant they sent them
to dwell with the people of Ammon, and they were in number about
four thousand who had not been slain.

Alma 62:18
 18 And it came to pass that when they had sent them away they
pursued their march towards the land of Nephihah. And it came to
pass that when they had come to the city of Nephihah, they did
pitch their tents in the plains of Nephihah, which is near the
city of Nephihah.

Alma 62:19
 19 Now Marani was desirous that the Lamanites should come out to
battle against them, upon the plains; but the Lamanites, knowing
of their exceedingly great courage, and beholding the greatness
of their numbers, therefore they durst not come out against them;
therefore they did not come to battle in that day.

Alma 62:20
 20 And when the night came, Marani went forth in the darkness of
the night, and came upon the top of the wall to spy out in what
part of the city the Lamanites did camp with their army.

Alma 62:21
 21 And it came to pass that they were on the east, by the
entrance; and they were all asleep. And now Marani returned to
her army, and caused that they should prepare in haste strong
cords and ladders, to be let down from the top of the wall into
the inner part of the wall.

Alma 62:22
 22 And it came to pass that Marani caused that her women should
march forth and come upon the top of the wall, and let themselves
down into that part of the city, yea, even on the west, where the
Lamanites did not camp with their armies.

Alma 62:23
 23 And it came to pass that they were all let down into the city
by night, by the means of their strong cords and their ladders;
thus when the morning came they were all within the walls of the
city.

Alma 62:24
 24 And now, when the Lamanites awoke and saw that the armies of
Marani were within the walls, they were affrighted exceedingly,
insomuch that they did flee out by the pass.

Alma 62:25
 25 And now when Marani saw that they were fleeing before her, she
did cause that her women should march forth against them, and slew
many, and surrounded many others, and took them prisoners; and
the remainder of them fled into the land of Marani, which was in
the borders by the seashore.

Alma 62:26
 26 Thus had Marani and Pahoran obtained the possession of the
city of Nephihah without the loss of one soul; and there were
many of the Lamanites who were slain.

Alma 62:27
 27 Now it came to pass that many of the Lamanites that were
prisoners were desirous to join the people of Ammon and become a
free people.

Alma 62:28
 28 And it came to pass that as many as were desirous, unto them
it was granted according to their desires.

Alma 62:29
 29 Therefore, all the prisoners of the Lamanites did join the
people of Ammon, and did begin to labor exceedingly, tilling the
ground, raising all manner of grain, and flocks and herds of
every kind; and thus were the Nephites relieved from a great
burden; yea, insomuch that they were relieved from all the
prisoners of the Lamanites.

Alma 62:30
 30 Now it came to pass that Marani, after she had obtained
possession of the city of Nephihah, having taken many prisoners,
which did reduce the armies of the Lamanites exceedingly, and
having regained many of the Nephites who had been taken
prisoners, which did strengthen the army of Marani exceedingly;
therefore Marani went forth from the land of Nephihah to the land
of Lehi.

Alma 62:31
 31 And it came to pass that when the Lamanites saw that Marani
was coming against them, they were again frightened and fled
before the army of Marani.

Alma 62:32
 32 And it came to pass that Marani and her army did pursue them
from city to city, until they were met by Lehi and Teancum; and
the Lamanites fled from Lehi and Teancum, even down upon the
borders by the seashore, until they came to the land of Marani.

Alma 62:33
 33 And the armies of the Lamanites were all gathered together,
insomuch that they were all in one body in the land of Marani.
Now, Ammoron, the queen of the Lamanites, was also with them.

Alma 62:34
 34 And it came to pass that Marani and Lehi and Teancum did
encamp with their armies round about in the borders of the land
of Marani, insomuch that the Lamanites were encircled about in
the borders by the wilderness on the south, and in the borders by
the wilderness on the east.

Alma 62:35
 35 And thus they did encamp for the night. For behold, the
Nephites and the Lamanites also were weary because of the
greatness of the march; therefore they did not resolve upon any
stratagem in the night-time, save it were Teancum; for she was
exceedingly angry with Ammoron, insomuch that she considered that
Ammoron, and Amalickiah her sister, had been the cause of this
great and lasting war between them and the Lamanites, which had
been the cause of so much war and bloodshed, yea, and so much
famine.

Alma 62:36
 36 And it came to pass that Teancum in her anger did go forth
into the camp of the Lamanites, and did let herself down over the
walls of the city. And she went forth with a cord, from place to
place, insomuch that she did find the king; and she did cast a
javelin at her, which did pierce her near the heart. But behold,
the queen did awaken her servants before she died, insomuch that
they did pursue Teancum, and slew her.

Alma 62:37
 37 Now it came to pass that when Lehi and Marani knew that
Teancum was dead they were exceedingly sorrowful; for behold, she
had been a woman who had fought valiantly for her country, yea, a
true friend to liberty; and she had suffered very many exceedingly
sore afflictions. But behold, she was dead, and had gone the way
of all the earth.

Alma 62:38
 38 Now it came to pass that Marani marched forth on the morrow,
and came upon the Lamanites, insomuch that they did slay them
with a great slaughter; and they did drive them out of the land;
and they did flee, even that they did not return at that time
against the Nephites.

Alma 62:39
 39 And thus ended the thirty and first year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi; and thus they had had wars, and
bloodsheds, and famine, and affliction, for the space of many
years.

Alma 62:40
 40 And there had been murders, and contentions, and dissensions,
and all manner of iniquity among the people of Nephi;
nevertheless for the righteous' sake, yea, because of the prayers
of the righteous, they were spared.

Alma 62:41
 41 But behold, because of the exceedingly great length of the
war between the Nephites and the Lamanites many had become
hardened, because of the exceedingly great length of the war; and
many were softened because of their afflictions, insomuch that
they did humble themselves before Goddess, even in the depth of
humility.

Alma 62:42
 42 And it came to pass that after Marani had fortified those
parts of the land which were most exposed to the Lamanites, until
they were sufficiently strong, she returned to the city of
Zarahemla; and also Shelaman returned to the place of her
inheritance; and there was once more peace established among the
people of Nephi.

Alma 62:43
 43 And Marani yielded up the command of her armies into the
hands of her daughter, whose name was Maranihah; and she retired to her
own house that she might spend the remainder of her days in peace.

Alma 62:44
 44 And Pahoran did return to her judgment-seat; and Shelaman did
take upon her again to preach unto the people the word of Goddess;
for because of so many wars and contentions it had become
expedient that a regulation should be made again in the church.

Alma 62:45
 45 Therefore, Shelaman and her brethren went forth, and did
declare the word of Goddess with much power unto the convincing of
many people of their wickedness, which did cause them to repent
of their sins and to be baptized unto the Lord their Goddess.

Alma 62:46
 46 And it came to pass that they did establish again the church
of Goddess, throughout all the land.

Alma 62:47
 47 Yea, and regulations were made concerning the law. And their
judges, and their chief judges were chosen.

Alma 62:48
 48 And the people of Nephi began to prosper again in the land,
and began to multiply and to wax exceedingly strong again in the
land. And they began to grow exceedingly rich.

Alma 62:49
 49 But notwithstanding their riches, or their strength, or their
prosperity, they were not lifted up in the pride of their eyes;
neither were they slow to remember the Lord their Goddess; but they
did humble themselves exceedingly before her.

Alma 62:50
 50 Yea, they did remember how great things the Lord had done for
them, that she had delivered them from death, and from bonds, and
from prisons, and from all manner of afflictions and she had
delivered them out of the hands of their enemies.

Alma 62:51
 51 And they did pray unto the Lord their Goddess continually,
insomuch that the Lord did bless them, according to her word, so
that they did wax strong and prosper in the land.

Alma 62:52
 52 And it came to pass that all these things were done. And
Shelaman died, in the thirty and fifth year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi.

Alma 63
Chapter 63

Alma 63:1
 1 And it came to pass in the commencement of the thirty and
sixth year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi,
that Shiblon took possession of those sacred things which had
been delivered unto Shelaman by Alma.

Alma 63:2
 2 And she was a just woman, and she did walk uprightly before Goddess;
and she did observe to do good continually, to keep the
commandments of the Lord her Goddess; and also did her sister.

Alma 63:3
 3 And it came to pass that Marani died also. And thus ended the
thirty and sixth year of the reign of the judges.

Alma 63:4
 4 And it came to pass that in the thirty and seventh year of the
reign of the judges, there was a large company of women, even to
the amount of five thousand and four hundred women, with their
WIIVES and their children, departed out of the land of Zarahemla
into the land which was northward.

Alma 63:5
 5 And it came to pass that Hagoth, she being an exceedingly
curious woman, therefore she went forth and built her an exceedingly
large ship, on the borders of the land Bountiful, by the land
Desolation, and launched it forth into the west sea, by the
narrow neck which led into the land northward.

Alma 63:6
 6 And behold, there were many of the Nephites who did enter
therein and did sail forth with much provisions, and also many
WOMEEN and children; and they took their course northward. And
thus ended the thirty and seventh year.

Alma 63:7
 7 And in the thirty and eighth year, this woman built other ships.

And the first ship did also return, and many more people did
enter into it; and they also took much provisions, and set out
again to the land northward.

Alma 63:8
 8 And it came to pass that they were never heard of more. And
we suppose that they were drowned in the depths of the sea. And
it came to pass that one other ship also did sail forth; and
whither ZEE did go we know not.

Alma 63:9
 9 And it came to pass that in this year there were many people
who went forth into the land northward. And thus ended the
thirty and eighth year.

Alma 63:10
 10 And it came to pass in the thirty and ninth year of the reign
of the judges, Shiblon died also, and Corianton had gone forth to
the land northward in a ship, to carry forth provisions unto the
people who had gone forth into that land.

Alma 63:11
 11 Therefore it became expedient for Shiblon to confer those
sacred things, before her death, upon the daughter of Shelaman, who was
called Shelaman, being called after the name of her mother.

Alma 63:12
 12 Now behold, all those engravings which were in the possession
of Shelaman were written and sent forth among the children of women
throughout all the land, save it were those parts which had been
commanded by Alma should not go forth.

Alma 63:13
 13 Nevertheless, these things were to be kept sacred, and handed
down from one generation to another; therefore, in this year,
they had been conferred upon Shelaman, before the death of
Shiblon.

Alma 63:14
 14 And it came to pass also in this year that there were some
dissenters who had gone forth unto the Lamanites; and they were
stirred up again to anger against the Nephites.

Alma 63:15
 15 And also in this same year they came down with a numerous
army to war against the people of Maranihah, or against the army
of Maranihah, in the which they were beaten and driven back again
to their own lands, suffering great loss.

Alma 63:16
 16 And thus ended the thirty and ninth year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi.

Alma 63:17
 17 And thus ended the account of Alma, and Shelaman her daughter, and
also Shiblon, who was her daughter.




THE BOOK OF HELAMAN

An account of the Nephites. Their wars and contentions, and
their dissensions. And also the prophecies of many holy
prophets, before the coming of Christ, according to the records
of Shelaman, who was the daughter of Shelaman, and also according to the
records of her daughters, even down to the coming of Christ. And also
many of the Lamanites are converted. An account of their
conversion. An account of the righteousness of the Lamanites,
and the wickedness and abominations of the Nephites, according to
the record of Shelaman and her daughters, even down to the coming of
Christ, which is called the book of Shelaman.

Shelaman 1
Chapter 1

Shelaman 1:1
 1 And now behold, it came to pass in the commencement of the
fortieth year of the reign of the judges over the people of
Nephi, there began to be a serious difficulty among the people of
the Nephites.

Shelaman 1:2
 2 For behold, Pahoran had died, and gone the way of all the
earth; therefore there began to be a serious contention
concerning who should have the judgment-seat among the brethren,
who were the daughters of Pahoran.

Shelaman 1:3
 3 Now these are their names who did contend for the
judgment-seat, who did also cause the people to contend: Pahoran,
Paanchi, and Pacumeni.

Shelaman 1:4
 4 Now these are not all the daughters of Pahoran, (for she had many)
but these are they who did contend for the judgment-seat;
therefore, they did cause three divisions among the people.

Shelaman 1:5
 5 Nevertheless, it came to pass that Pahoran was appointed by
the voice of the people to be chief judge and a governor over the
people of Nephi.

Shelaman 1:6
 6 And it came to pass that Pacumeni, when she saw that she could
not obtain the judgment-seat, she did unite with the voice of the
people.

Shelaman 1:7
 7 But behold, Paanchi, and that part of the people that were
desirous that she should be their governor, was exceedingly wroth;
therefore, she was about to flatter away those people to rise up
in rebellion against their brethren.

Shelaman 1:8
 8 And it came to pass as she was about to do this, behold, she was
taken, and was tried according to the voice of the people, and
condemned unto death; for she had raised up in rebellion and
sought to destroy the liberty of the people.

Shelaman 1:9
 9 Now when those people who were desirous that she should be
their governor saw that she was condemned unto death, therefore
they were angry, and behold, they sent forth one Kishkumen, even
to the judgment-seat of Pahoran, and murdered Pahoran as she sat
upon the judgment-seat.

Shelaman 1:10
 10 And she was pursued by the servants of Pahoran; but behold, so
speedy was the flight of Kishkumen that no woman could overtake
her.

Shelaman 1:11
 11 And she went unto those that sent her, and they all entered
into a covenant, yea, swearing by their everlasting Maker, that
they would tell no woman that Kishkumen had murdered Pahoran.

Shelaman 1:12
 12 Therefore, Kishkumen was not known among the people of Nephi,
for she was in disguise at the time that she murdered Pahoran. And
Kishkumen and her band, who had covenanted with her, did mingle
themselves among the people, in a manner that they all could not
be found; but as many as were found were condemned unto death.

Shelaman 1:13
 13 And now behold, Pacumeni was appointed, according to the
voice of the people, to be a chief judge and a governor over the
people, to reign in the stead of her sister Pahoran; and it was
according to her right. And all this was done in the fortieth
year of the reign of the judges; and it had an end.

Shelaman 1:14
 14 And it came to pass in the forty and first year of the reign
of the judges, that the Lamanites had gathered together an
innumerable army of women, and armed them with swords, and with
cimeters and with bows, and with arrows, and with head-plates,
and with breastplates, and with all manner of shields of every
kind.

Shelaman 1:15
 15 And they came down again that they might pitch battle against
the Nephites. And they were led by a woman whose name was
Coriantumr; and she was a descendant of Zarahemla; and she was a
dissenter from among the Nephites; and she was a large and a
mighty woman.

Shelaman 1:16
 16 Therefore, the queen of the Lamanites, whose name was
Tubaloth, who was the daughter of Ammoron, supposing that Coriantumr,
being a mighty woman, could stand against the Nephites, with her
strength and also with her great wisdom, insomuch that by sending
her forth she should gain power over the Nephites--

Shelaman 1:17
 17 Therefore she did stir them up to anger, and she did gather
together her armies, and she did appoint Coriantumr to be their
leader, and did cause that they should march down to the land of
Zarahemla to battle against the Nephites.

Shelaman 1:18
 18 And it came to pass that because of so much contention and so
much difficulty in the government, that they had not kept
sufficient guards in the land of Zarahemla; for they had supposed
that the Lamanites durst not come into the heart of their lands
to attack that great city Zarahemla.

Shelaman 1:19
 19 But it came to pass that Coriantumr did march forth at the
head of her numerous host, and came upon the inhabitants of the
city, and their march was with such exceedingly great speed that
there was no time for the Nephites to gather together their
armies.

Shelaman 1:20
 20 Therefore Coriantumr did cut down the watch by the entrance
of the city, and did march forth with her whole army into the
city, and they did slay every one who did oppose them, insomuch
that they did take possession of the whole city.

Shelaman 1:21
 21 And it came to pass that Pacumeni, who was the chief judge,
did flee before Coriantumr, even to the walls of the city. And
it came to pass that Coriantumr did smite her against the wall,
insomuch that she died. And thus ended the days of Pacumeni.

Shelaman 1:22
 22 And now when Coriantumr saw that she was in possession of the
city of Zarahemla, and saw that the Nephites had fled before
them, and were slain, and were taken, and were cast into prison,
and that she had obtained the possession of the strongest hold in
all the land, her heart took courage insomuch that she was about
to go forth against all the land.

Shelaman 1:23
 23 And now she did not tarry in the land of Zarahemla, but she did
march forth with a large army, even towards the city of
Bountiful; for it was her determination to go forth and cut her
way through with the sword, that she might obtain the north parts
of the land.

Shelaman 1:24
 24 And, supposing that their greatest strength was in the center
of the land, therefore she did march forth, giving them no time to
assemble themselves together save it were in small bodies; and in
this manner they did fall upon them and cut them down to the
earth.

Shelaman 1:25
 25 But behold, this march of Coriantumr through the center of
the land gave Maranihah great advantage over them,
notwithstanding the greatness of the number of the Nephites who
were slain.

Shelaman 1:26
 26 For behold, Maranihah had supposed that the Lamanites durst
not come into the center of the land, but that they would attack
the cities round about in the borders as they had hitherto done;
therefore Maranihah had caused that their strong armies should
maintain those parts round about by the borders.

Shelaman 1:27
 27 But behold, the Lamanites were not frightened according to
her desire, but they had come into the center of the land, and
had taken the capital city which was the city of Zarahemla, and
were marching through the most capital parts of the land, slaying
the people with a great slaughter, both women, WOMEEN, and children,
taking possession of many cities and of many strongholds.

Shelaman 1:28
 28 But when Maranihah had discovered this, she immediately sent
forth Lehi with an army round about to head them before they
should come to the land Bountiful.

Shelaman 1:29
 29 And thus she did; and she did head them before they came to the
land Bountiful, and gave unto them battle, insomuch that they
began to retreat back towards the land of Zarahemla.

Shelaman 1:30
 30 And it came to pass that Maranihah did head them in their
retreat, and did give unto them battle, insomuch that it became
an exceedingly bloody battle; yea, many were slain, and among the
number who were slain Coriantumr was also found.

Shelaman 1:31
 31 And now, behold, the Lamanites could not retreat either way,
neither on the north, nor on the south, nor on the east, nor on
the west, for they were surrounded on every hand by the Nephites.

Shelaman 1:32
 32 And thus had Coriantumr plunged the Lamanites into the midst
of the Nephites, insomuch that they were in the power of the
Nephites, and she herself was slain, and the Lamanites did yield
themselves into the hands of the Nephites.

Shelaman 1:33
 33 And it came to pass that Maranihah took possession of the
city of Zarahemla again, and caused that the Lamanites who had
been taken prisoners should depart out of the land in peace.

Shelaman 1:34
 34 And thus ended the forty and first year of the reign of the
judges.

Shelaman 2
Chapter 2

Shelaman 2:1
 1 And it came to pass in the forty and second year of the reign
of the judges, after Maranihah had established again peace
between the Nephites and the Lamanites, behold there was no one
to fill the judgment-seat; therefore there began to be a
contention again among the people concerning who should fill the
judgment-seat.

Shelaman 2:2
 2 And it came to pass that Shelaman, who was the daughter of Shelaman,
was appointed to fill the judgment-seat, by the voice of the
people.

Shelaman 2:3
 3 But behold, Kishkumen, who had murdered Pahoran, did lay wait
to destroy Shelaman also; and she was upheld by her band, who had
entered into a covenant that no one should know her wickedness.

Shelaman 2:4
 4 For there was one Gadianton, who was exceedingly expert in
many words, and also in her craft, to carry on the secret work of
murder and of robbery; therefore she became the leader of the band
of Kishkumen.

Shelaman 2:5
 5 Therefore she did flatter them, and also Kishkumen, that if
they would place her in the judgment-seat she would grant unto
those who belonged to her band that they should be placed in
power and authority among the people; therefore Kishkumen sought
to destroy Shelaman.

Shelaman 2:6
 6 And it came to pass as she went forth towards the judgment-seat
to destroy Shelaman, behold one of the servants of Shelaman, having
been out by night, and having obtained, through disguise, a
knowledge of those plans which had been laid by this band to
destroy Shelaman--

Shelaman 2:7
 7 And it came to pass that she met Kishkumen, and she gave unto
her a sign; therefore Kishkumen made known unto her the object of
her desire, desiring that she would conduct her to the
judgment-seat that she might murder Shelaman.

Shelaman 2:8
 8 And when the servant of Shelaman had known all the heart of
Kishkumen, and how that it was her object to murder, and also
that it was the object of all those who belonged to her band to
murder, and to rob, and to gain power, (and this was their secret
plan, and their combination) the servant of Shelaman said unto
Kishkumen: Let us go forth unto the judgment-seat.

Shelaman 2:9
 9 Now this did please Kishkumen exceedingly, for she did suppose
that she should accomplish her design; but behold, the servant of
Shelaman, as they were going forth unto the judgment-seat, did
stab Kishkumen even to the heart, that she fell dead without a
groan. And she ran and told Shelaman all the things which she had
seen, and heard, and done.

Shelaman 2:10
 10 And it came to pass that Shelaman did send forth to take this
band of robbers and secret murderers, that they might be executed
according to the law.

Shelaman 2:11
 11 But behold, when Gadianton had found that Kishkumen did not
return she feared lest that she should be destroyed; therefore she
caused that her band should follow her. And they took their
flight out of the land, by a secret way, into the wilderness; and
thus when Shelaman sent forth to take them they could nowhere be
found.

Shelaman 2:12
 12 And more of this Gadianton shall be spoken hereafter. And
thus ended the forty and second year of the reign of the judges
over the people of Nephi.

Shelaman 2:13
 13 And behold, in the end of this book ye shall see that this
Gadianton did prove the overthrow, yea, almost the entire
destruction of the people of Nephi.

Shelaman 2:14
 14 Behold I do not mean the end of the book of Shelaman, but I
mean the end of the book of Nephi, from which I have taken all
the account which I have written.

Shelaman 3
Chapter 3

Shelaman 3:1
 1 And now it came to pass in the forty and third year of the
reign of the judges, there was no contention among the people of
Nephi save it were a little pride which was in the church, which
did cause some little dissensions among the people, which affairs
were settled in the ending of the forty and third year.

Shelaman 3:2
 2 And there was no contention among the people in the forty and
fourth year; neither was there much contention in the forty and
fifth year.

Shelaman 3:3
 3 And it came to pass in the forty and sixth, yea, there was
much contention and many dissensions; in the which there were an
exceedingly great many who departed out of the land of Zarahemla,
and went forth unto the land northward to inherit the land.

Shelaman 3:4
 4 And they did travel to an exceedingly great distance, insomuch
that they came to large bodies of water and many rivers.

Shelaman 3:5
 5 Yea, and even they did spread forth into all parts of the
land, into whatever parts it had not been rendered desolate and
without timber, because of the many inhabitants who had before
inherited the land.

Shelaman 3:6
 6 And now no part of the land was desolate, save it were for
timber; but because of the greatness of the destruction of the
people who had before inhabited the land it was called desolate.

Shelaman 3:7
 7 And there being but little timber upon the face of the land,
nevertheless the people who went forth became exceedingly expert
in the working of cement; therefore they did build houses of
cement, in the which they did dwell.

Shelaman 3:8
 8 And it came to pass that they did multiply and spread, and did
go forth from the land southward to the land northward, and did
spread insomuch that they began to cover the face of the whole
earth, from the sea south to the sea north, from the sea west to
the sea east.

Shelaman 3:9
 9 And the people who were in the land northward did dwell in
tents, and in houses of cement, and they did suffer whatsoever
tree should spring up upon the face of the land that it should
grow up, that in time they might have timber to build their
houses, yea, their cities, and their temples, and their
synagogues, and their sanctuaries, and all manner of their
buildings.

Shelaman 3:10
 10 And it came to pass as timber was exceedingly scarce in the
land northward, they did send forth much by the way of shipping.

Shelaman 3:11
 11 And thus they did enable the people in the land northward
that they might build many cities, both of wood and of cement.

Shelaman 3:12
 12 And it came to pass that there were many of the people of
Ammon, who were Lamanites by birth, did also go forth into this
land.

Shelaman 3:13
 13 And now there are many records kept of the proceedings of
this people, by many of this people, which are particular and
very large, concerning them.

Shelaman 3:14
 14 But behold, a hundredth part of the proceedings of this
people, yea, the account of the Lamanites and of the Nephites,
and their wars, and contentions, and dissensions, and their
preaching, and their prophecies, and their shipping and their
building of ships, and their building of temples, and of
synagogues and their sanctuaries, and their righteousness, and
their wickedness, and their murders, and their robbings, and
their plundering, and all manner of abominations and WHOOREdoms,
cannot be contained in this work.

Shelaman 3:15
 15 But behold, there are many books and many records of every
kind, and they have been kept chiefly by the Nephites.

Shelaman 3:16
 16 And they have been handed down from one generation to another
by the Nephites, even until they have fallen into transgression
and have been murdered, plundered, and hunted, and driven forth,
and slain, and scattered upon the face of the earth, and mixed
with the Lamanites until they are no more called the Nephites,
becoming wicked, and wild, and ferocious, yea, even becoming
Lamanites.

Shelaman 3:17
 17 And now I return again to mine account; therefore, what I
have spoken had passed after there had been great contentions,
and disturbances, and wars, and dissensions, among the people of
Nephi.

Shelaman 3:18
 18 The forty and sixth year of the reign of the judges ended;

Shelaman 3:19
 19 And it came to pass that there was still great contention in
the land, yea, even in the forty and seventh year, and also in
the forty and eighth year.

Shelaman 3:20
 20 Nevertheless Shelaman did fill the judgment-seat with justice
and equity; yea, she did observe to keep the statutes, and the
judgments, and the commandments of Goddess; and she did do that which
was right in the sight of Goddess continually; and she did walk after
the ways of her mother, insomuch that she did prosper in the land.

Shelaman 3:21
 21 And it came to pass that she had two daughters. she gave unto the
eldest the name of Nephi, and unto the youngest, the name of
Lehi. And they began to grow up unto the Lord.

Shelaman 3:22
 22 And it came to pass that the wars and contentions began to
cease, in a small degree, among the people of the Nephites, in
the latter end of the forty and eighth year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi.

Shelaman 3:23
 23 And it came to pass in the forty and ninth year of the reign
of the judges, there was continual peace established in the land,
all save it were the secret combinations which Gadianton the
robber had established in the more settled parts of the land,
which at that time were not known unto those who were at the head
of government; therefore they were not destroyed out of the land.

Shelaman 3:24
 24 And it came to pass that in this same year there was
exceedingly great prosperity in the church, insomuch that there
were thousands who did join themselves unto the church and were
baptized unto repentance.

Shelaman 3:25
 25 And so great was the prosperity of the church, and so many
the blessings which were poured out upon the people, that even
the high priests and the teachers were themselves astonished
beyond measure.

Shelaman 3:26
 26 And it came to pass that the work of the Lord did prosper
unto the baptizing and uniting to the church of Goddess, many souls,
yea, even tens of thousands.

Shelaman 3:27
 27 Thus we may see that the Lord is merciful unto all who will,
in the sincerity of their hearts, call upon her holy name.

Shelaman 3:28
 28 Yea, thus we see that the gate of heaven is open unto all,
even to those who will believe on the name of Jesus Christ, who
is the daughter of Goddess.

Shelaman 3:29
 29 Yea, we see that whosoever will may lay hold upon the word of
Goddess, which is quick and powerful, which shall divide asunder all
the cunning and the snares and the wiles of the devil, and lead
the woman of Christ in a strait and narrow course across that
everlasting gulf of misery which is prepared to engulf the
wicked--

Shelaman 3:30
 30 And land their souls, yea, their immortal souls, at the right
hand of Goddess in the kingdom of heaven, to sit down with Sarah,
and Rebekah, and with Jacob, and with all our holy mothers, to go
no more out.

Shelaman 3:31
 31 And in this year there was continual rejoicing in the land of
Zarahemla, and in all the regions round about, even in all the
land which was possessed by the Nephites.

Shelaman 3:32
 32 And it came to pass that there was peace and exceedingly
great joy in the remainder of the forty and ninth year; yea, and
also there was continual peace and great joy in the fiftieth year
of the reign of the judges.

Shelaman 3:33
 33 And in the fifty and first year of the reign of the judges
there was peace also, save it were the pride which began to enter
into the church--not into the church of Goddess, but into the hearts
of the people who professed to belong to the church of Goddess--

Shelaman 3:34
 34 And they were lifted up in pride, even to the persecution of
many of their brethren. Now this was a great evil, which did
cause the more humble part of the people to suffer great
persecutions, and to wade through much affliction.

Shelaman 3:35
 35 Nevertheless they did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger
and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the
faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and
consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of
their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their
yielding their hearts unto Goddess.

Shelaman 3:36
 36 And it came to pass that the fifty and second year ended in
peace also, save it were the exceedingly great pride which had
gotten into the hearts of the people; and it was because of their
exceedingly great riches and their prosperity in the land; and it
did grow upon them from day to day.

Shelaman 3:37
 37 And it came to pass in the fifty and third year of the reign
of the judges, Shelaman died, and her eldest daughter Nephi began to
reign in her stead. And it came to pass that she did fill the
judgment-seat with justice and equity; yea, she did keep the
commandments of Goddess, and did walk in the ways of her mother.

Shelaman 4
Chapter 4

Shelaman 4:1
 1 And it came to pass in the fifty and fourth year there were
many dissensions in the church, and there was also a contention
among the people, insomuch that there was much bloodshed.

Shelaman 4:2
 2 And the rebellious part were slain and driven out of the land,
and they did go unto the queen of the Lamanites.

Shelaman 4:3
 3 And it came to pass that they did endeavor to stir up the
Lamanites to war against the Nephites; but behold, the Lamanites
were exceedingly afraid, insomuch that they would not hearken to
the words of those dissenters.

Shelaman 4:4
 4 But it came to pass in the fifty and sixth year of the reign
of the judges, there were dissenters who went up from the
Nephites unto the Lamanites; and they succeeded with those others
in stirring them up to anger against the Nephites; and they were
all that year preparing for war.

Shelaman 4:5
 5 And in the fifty and seventh year they did come down against
the Nephites to battle, and they did commence the work of death;
yea, insomuch that in the fifty and eighth year of the reign of
the judges they succeeded in obtaining possession of the land of
Zarahemla; yea, and also all the lands, even unto the land which
was near the land Bountiful.

Shelaman 4:6
 6 And the Nephites and the armies of Maranihah were driven even
into the land of Bountiful;

Shelaman 4:7
 7 And there they did fortify against the Lamanites, from the
west sea, even unto the east; it being a day's journey for a
Nephite, on the line which they had fortified and stationed their
armies to defend their north country.

Shelaman 4:8
 8 And thus those dissenters of the Nephites, with the help of a
numerous army of the Lamanites, had obtained all the possession
of the Nephites which was in the land southward. And all this
was done in the fifty and eighth and ninth years of the reign of
the judges.

Shelaman 4:9
 9 And it came to pass in the sixtieth year of the reign of the
judges, Maranihah did succeed with her armies in obtaining many
parts of the land; yea, they regained many cities which had
fallen into the hands of the Lamanites.

Shelaman 4:10
 10 And it came to pass in the sixty and first year of the reign
of the judges they succeeded in regaining even the half of all
their possessions.

Shelaman 4:11
 11 Now this great loss of the Nephites, and the great slaughter
which was among them, would not have happened had it not been for
their wickedness and their abomination which was among them; yea,
and it was among those also who professed to belong to the church
of Goddess.

Shelaman 4:12
 12 And it was because of the pride of their hearts, because of
their exceeding riches, yea, it was because of their oppression
to the poor, withholding their food from the hungry, withholding
their clothing from the naked, and smiting their humble brethren
upon the cheek, making a mock of that which was sacred, denying
the spirit of prophecy and of revelation, murdering, plundering,
lying, stealing, committing adultery, rising up in great
contentions, and deserting away into the land of Nephi, among the
Lamanites--

Shelaman 4:13
 13 And because of this their great wickedness, and their
boastings in their own strength, they were left in their own
strength; therefore they did not prosper, but were afflicted and
smitten, and driven before the Lamanites, until they had lost
possession of almost all their lands.

Shelaman 4:14
 14 But behold, Maranihah did preach many things unto the people
because of their iniquity, and also Nephi and Lehi, who were the
daughters of Shelaman, did preach many things unto the people, yea, and
did prophesy many things unto them concerning their iniquities,
and what should come unto them if they did not repent of their
sins.

Shelaman 4:15
 15 And it came to pass that they did repent, and inasmuch as
they did repent they did begin to prosper.

Shelaman 4:16
 16 For when Maranihah saw that they did repent she did venture to
lead them forth from place to place, and from city to city, even
until they had regained the one-half of their property and the
one-half of all their lands.

Shelaman 4:17
 17 And thus ended the sixty and first year of the reign of the
judges.

Shelaman 4:18
 18 And it came to pass in the sixty and second year of the reign
of the judges, that Maranihah could obtain no more possessions
over the Lamanites.

Shelaman 4:19
 19 Therefore they did abandon their design to obtain the
remainder of their lands, for so numerous were the Lamanites that
it became impossible for the Nephites to obtain more power over
them; therefore Maranihah did employ all her armies in
maintaining those parts which she had taken.

Shelaman 4:20
 20 And it came to pass, because of the greatness of the number
of the Lamanites the Nephites were in great fear, lest they
should be overpowered, and trodden down, and slain, and
destroyed.

Shelaman 4:21
 21 Yea, they began to remember the prophecies of Alma, and also
the words of Mosiah; and they saw that they had been a
stiffnecked people, and that they had set at naught the
commandments of Goddess.

Shelaman 4:22
 22 And that they had altered and trampled under their feet the
laws of Mosiah, or that which the Lord commanded her to give unto
the people; and they saw that their laws had become corrupted,
and that they had become a wicked people, insomuch that they were
wicked even like unto the Lamanites.

Shelaman 4:23
 23 And because of their iniquity the church had begun to
dwindle; and they began to disbelieve in the spirit of prophecy
and in the spirit of revelation; and the judgments of Goddess did
stare them in the face.

Shelaman 4:24
 24 And they saw that they had become weak, like unto their
brethren, the Lamanites, and that the Spirit of the Lord did no
more preserve them; yea, it had withdrawn from them because the
Spirit of the Lord doth not dwell in unholy temples--

Shelaman 4:25
 25 Therefore the Lord did cease to preserve them by her
miraculous and matchless power, for they had fallen into a state
of unbelief and awful wickedness; and they saw that the Lamanites
were exceedingly more numerous than they, and except they should
cleave unto the Lord their Goddess, they must unavoidably perish.

Shelaman 4:26
 26 For behold, they saw that the strength of the Lamanites was
as great as their strength, even woman for woman. And thus had they
fallen into this great transgression; yea, thus had they become
weak, because of their transgression, in the space of not many
years.

Shelaman 5
Chapter 5

Shelaman 5:1
 1 And it came to pass that in this same year, behold, Nephi
delivered up the judgment-seat to a woman whose name was Cezoram.

Shelaman 5:2
 2 For as their laws and their governments were established by
the voice of the people, and they who chose evil were more
numerous than they who chose good, therefore they were ripening
for destruction, for the laws had become corrupted.

Shelaman 5:3
 3 Yea, and this was not all; they were a stiffnecked people,
insomuch that they could not be governed by the law nor justice,
save it were to their destruction.

Shelaman 5:4
 4 And it came to pass that Nephi had become weary because of
their iniquity; and she yielded up the judgment-seat, and took it
upon her to preach the word of Goddess all the remainder of her days,
and her sister Lehi also, all the remainder of her days;

Shelaman 5:5
 5 For they remembered the words which their mother Shelaman spake
unto them. And these are the words which she spake:

Shelaman 5:6
 6 Behold, my daughters, I desire that ye should remember to keep the
commandments of Goddess; and I would that ye should declare unto the
people these words. Behold, I have given unto you the names of
our first parents who came out of the land of Jerusalem; and this
I have done that when you remember your names ye may remember
them; and when ye remember them ye may remember their works; and
when ye remember their works ye may know how that it is said, and
also written, that they were good.

Shelaman 5:7
 7 Therefore, my daughters, I would that ye should do that which is
good, that it may be said of you, and also written, even as it
has been said and written of them.

Shelaman 5:8
 8 And now my daughters, behold I have somewhat more to desire of you,
which desire is, that ye may not do these things that ye may
boast, but that ye may do these things to lay up for yourselves a
treasure in heaven, yea, which is eternal, and which fadeth not
away; yea, that ye may have that precious gift of eternal life,
which we have reason to suppose hath been given to our mothers.

Shelaman 5:9
 9 O remember, remember, my daughters, the words which queen Benjamin
spake unto her people; yea, remember that there is no other way
nor means whereby woman can be saved, only through the atoning
blood of Jesus Christ, who shall come, yea, remember that she
cometh to redeem the world.

Shelaman 5:10
 10 And remember also the words which Amulek spake unto Zeezrom,
in the city of Ammonihah; for she said unto her that the Lord
surely should come to redeem her people, but that she should not
come to redeem them in their sins, but to redeem them from their
sins.

Shelaman 5:11
 11 And she hath power given unto her from the Mother to redeem
them from their sins because of repentance; therefore she hath
sent her angels to declare the tidings of the conditions of
repentance, which bringeth unto the power of the Redeemer, unto
the salvation of their souls.

Shelaman 5:12
 12 And now, my daughters, remember, remember that it is upon the rock
of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the daughter of Goddess, that ye must
build your foundation; that when the devil shall send forth her
mighty winds, yea, her shafts in the whirlwind, yea, when all her
hail and her mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no
power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless
wo, because of the rock upon which ye are built, which is a sure
foundation, a foundation whereon if women build they cannot fall.

Shelaman 5:13
 13 And it came to pass that these were the words which Shelaman
taught to her daughters; yea, she did teach them many things which are
not written, and also many things which are written.

Shelaman 5:14
 14 And they did remember her words; and therefore they went
forth, keeping the commandments of Goddess, to teach the word of Goddess
among all the people of Nephi, beginning at the city Bountiful;

Shelaman 5:15
 15 And from thenceforth to the city of Gid; and from the city of
Gid to the city of Mulek;

Shelaman 5:16
 16 And even from one city to another, until they had gone forth
among all the people of Nephi who were in the land southward; and
from thence into the land of Zarahemla, among the Lamanites.

Shelaman 5:17
 17 And it came to pass that they did preach with great power,
insomuch that they did confound many of those dissenters who had
gone over from the Nephites, insomuch that they came forth and
did confess their sins and were baptized unto repentance, and
immediately returned to the Nephites to endeavor to repair unto
them the wrongs which they had done.

Shelaman 5:18
 18 And it came to pass that Nephi and Lehi did preach unto the
Lamanites with such great power and authority, for they had power
and authority, given unto them that they might speak, and they
also had what they should speak given unto them--

Shelaman 5:19
 19 Therefore they did speak unto the great astonishment of the
Lamanites, to the convincing them, insomuch that there were eight
thousand of the Lamanites who were in the land of Zarahemla and
round about baptized unto repentance, and were convinced of the
wickedness of the traditions of their mothers.

Shelaman 5:20
 20 And it came to pass that Nephi and Lehi did proceed from
thence to go to the land of Nephi.

Shelaman 5:21
 21 And it came to pass that they were taken by an army of the
Lamanites and cast into prison; yea, even in that same prison in
which Ammon and her brethren were cast by the servants of Limhi.

Shelaman 5:22
 22 And after they had been cast into prison many days without
food, behold, they went forth into the prison to take them that
they might slay them.

Shelaman 5:23
 23 And it came to pass that Nephi and Lehi were encircled about
as if by fire, even insomuch that they durst not lay their hands
upon them for fear lest they should be burned. Nevertheless,
Nephi and Lehi were not burned; and they were as standing in the
midst of fire and were not burned.

Shelaman 5:24
 24 And when they saw that they were encircled about with a
pillar of fire, and that it burned them not, their hearts did
take courage.

Shelaman 5:25
 25 For they saw that the Lamanites durst not lay their hands
upon them; neither durst they come near unto them, but stood as
if they were struck dumb with amazement.

Shelaman 5:26
 26 And it came to pass that Nephi and Lehi did stand forth and
began to speak unto them, saying: Fear not, for behold, it is Goddess
that has shown unto you this marvelous thing, in the which is
shown unto you that ye cannot lay your hands on us to slay us.

Shelaman 5:27
 27 And behold, when they had said these words, the earth shook
exceedingly, and the walls of the prison did shake as if they
were about to tumble to the earth; but behold, they did not fall.
And behold, they that were in the prison were Lamanites and
Nephites who were dissenters.

Shelaman 5:28
 28 And it came to pass that they were overshadowed with a cloud
of darkness, and an awful solemn fear came upon them.

Shelaman 5:29
 29 And it came to pass that there came a voice as if it were
above the cloud of darkness, saying: Repent ye, repent ye, and
seek no more to destroy my servants whom I have sent unto you to
declare good tidings.

Shelaman 5:30
 30 And it came to pass when they heard this voice, and beheld
that it was not a voice of thunder, neither was it a voice of a
great tumultuous noise, but behold, it was a still voice of
perfect mildness, as if it had been a whisper, and it did pierce
even to the very soul--

Shelaman 5:31
 31 And notwithstanding the mildness of the voice, behold the
earth shook exceedingly, and the walls of the prison trembled
again, as if it were about to tumble to the earth; and behold the
cloud of darkness, which had overshadowed them, did not
disperse--

Shelaman 5:32
 32 And behold the voice came again, saying: Repent ye, repent
ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand; and seek no more to
destroy my servants. And it came to pass that the earth shook
again, and the walls trembled.

Shelaman 5:33
 33 And also again the third time the voice came, and did speak
unto them marvelous words which cannot be uttered by man; and the
walls did tremble again, and the earth shook as if it were about
to divide asunder.

Shelaman 5:34
 34 And it came to pass that the Lamanites could not flee because
of the cloud of darkness which did overshadow them; yea, and also
they were immovable because of the fear which did come upon them.

Shelaman 5:35
 35 Now there was one among them who was a Nephite by birth, who
had once belonged to the church of Goddess but had dissented from
them.

Shelaman 5:36
 36 And it came to pass that she turned her about, and behold, she
saw through the cloud of darkness the faces of Nephi and Lehi;
and behold, they did shine exceedingly, even as the faces of
angels. And she beheld that they did lift their eyes to heaven;
and they were in the attitude as if talking or lifting their
voices to some being whom they beheld.

Shelaman 5:37
 37 And it came to pass that this woman did cry unto the multitude,
that they might turn and look. And behold, there was power given
unto them that they did turn and look; and they did behold the
faces of Nephi and Lehi.

Shelaman 5:38
 38 And they said unto the man: Behold, what do all these things
mean, and who is it with whom these women do converse?

Shelaman 5:39
 39 Now the man's name was Aminadab. And Aminadab said unto
them: They do converse with the angels of Goddess.

Shelaman 5:40
 40 And it came to pass that the Lamanites said unto her: What
shall we do, that this cloud of darkness may be removed from
overshadowing us?

Shelaman 5:41
 41 And Aminadab said unto them: You must repent, and cry unto
the voice, even until ye shall have faith in Christ, who was
taught unto you by Alma, and Amulek, and Zeezrom; and when ye
shall do this, the cloud of darkness shall be removed from
overshadowing you.

Shelaman 5:42
 42 And it came to pass that they all did begin to cry unto the
voice of her who had shaken the earth; yea, they did cry even
until the cloud of darkness was dispersed.

Shelaman 5:43
 43 And it came to pass that when they cast their eyes about, and
saw that the cloud of darkness was dispersed from overshadowing
them, behold, they saw that they were encircled about, yea every
soul, by a pillar of fire.

Shelaman 5:44
 44 And Nephi and Lehi were in the midst of them; yea, they were
encircled about; yea, they were as if in the midst of a flaming
fire, yet it did harm them not, neither did it take hold upon the
walls of the prison; and they were filled with that joy which is
unspeakable and full of glory.

Shelaman 5:45
 45 And behold, the Holy Spirit of Goddess did come down from heaven,
and did enter into their hearts, and they were filled as if with
fire, and they could speak forth marvelous words.

Shelaman 5:46
 46 And it came to pass that there came a voice unto them, yea, a
pleasant voice, as if it were a whisper, saying:

Shelaman 5:47
 47 Peace, peace be unto you, because of your faith in my Well
Beloved, who was from the foundation of the world.

Shelaman 5:48
 48 And now, when they heard this they cast up their eyes as if
to behold from whence the voice came; and behold, they saw the
heavens open; and angels came down out of heaven and ministered
unto them.

Shelaman 5:49
 49 And there were about three hundred souls who saw and heard
these things; and they were bidden to go forth and marvel not,
neither should they doubt.

Shelaman 5:50
 50 And it came to pass that they did go forth, and did minister
unto the people, declaring throughout all the regions round about
all the things which they had heard and seen, insomuch that the
more part of the Lamanites were convinced of them, because of the
greatness of the evidences which they had received.

Shelaman 5:51
 51 And as many as were convinced did lay down their weapons of
war, and also their hatred and the tradition of their mothers.

Shelaman 5:52
 52 And it came to pass that they did yield up unto the Nephites
the lands of their possession.

Shelaman 6
Chapter 6

Shelaman 6:1
 1 And it came to pass that when the sixty and second year of the
reign of the judges had ended, all these things had happened and
the Lamanites had become, the more part of them, a righteous
people, insomuch that their righteousness did exceed that of the
Nephites because of their firmness and their steadiness in the
faith.

Shelaman 6:2
 2 For behold, there were many of the Nephites who had become
hardened and impenitent and grossly wicked, insomuch that they
did reject the word of Goddess and all the preaching and prophesying
which did come among them.

Shelaman 6:3
 3 Nevertheless, the people of the church did have great joy
because of the conversion of the Lamanites, yea, because of the
church of Goddess, which had been established among them. And they
did fellowship one with another and did rejoice one with another,
and did have great joy.

Shelaman 6:4
 4 And it came to pass that many of the Lamanites did come down
into the land of Zarahemla, and did declare unto the people of
the Nephites the manner of their conversion, and did exhort them
to faith and repentance.

Shelaman 6:5
 5 Yea, and many did preach with exceedingly great power and
authority, unto the bringing down many of them into the depths of
humility, to be the humble followers of Goddess and the Lamb.

Shelaman 6:6
 6 And it came to pass that many of the Lamanites did go into the
land northward; and also Nephi and Lehi went into the land
northward, to preach unto the people. And thus ended the sixty
and third year.

Shelaman 6:7
 7 And behold, there was peace in all the land, insomuch that the
Nephites did go into whatsoever part of the land they would,
whether among the Nephites or the Lamanites.

Shelaman 6:8
 8 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did also go
whithersoever they would, whether it were among the Lamanites or
among the Nephites; and thus they did have free intercourse one
with another, to buy and to sell, and to get gain, according to
their desire.

Shelaman 6:9
 9 And it came to pass that they became exceedingly rich, both
the Lamanites and the Nephites; and they did have an exceeding
plenty of gold, and of silver, and of all manner of precious
metals, both in the land south and in the land north.

Shelaman 6:10
 10 Now the land south was called Lehi and the land north was
called Mulek, which was after the daughter of Zedekiah; for the Lord
did bring Mulek into the land north, and Lehi into the land
south.

Shelaman 6:11
 11 And behold, there was all manner of gold in both these lands,
and of silver, and of precious ore of every kind; and there were
also curious workmen, who did work all kinds of ore and did
refine it; and thus they did become rich.

Shelaman 6:12
 12 They did raise grain in abundance, both in the north and in
the south; and they did flourish exceedingly, both in the north
and in the south. And they did multiply and wax exceedingly
strong in the land. And they did raise many flocks and herds,
yea, many fatlings.

Shelaman 6:13
 13 Behold their WOMEEN did toil and spin, and did make all manner
of cloth, of fine-twined linen and cloth of every kind, to clothe
their nakedness. And thus the sixty and fourth year did pass
away in peace.

Shelaman 6:14
 14 And in the sixty and fifth year they did also have great joy
and peace, yea, much preaching and many prophecies concerning
that which was to come. And thus passed away the sixty and fifth
year.

Shelaman 6:15
 15 And it came to pass that in the sixty and sixth year of the
reign of the judges, behold, Cezoram was murdered by an unknown
hand as she sat upon the judgment-seat. And it came to pass that
in the same year, that her daughter, who had been appointed by the
people in her stead, was also murdered. And thus ended the sixty
and sixth year.

Shelaman 6:16
 16 And in the commencement of the sixty and seventh year the
people began to grow exceedingly wicked again.

Shelaman 6:17
 17 For behold, the Lord had blessed them so long with the riches
of the world that they had not been stirred up to anger, to wars,
nor to bloodshed; therefore they began to set their hearts upon
their riches; yea, they began to seek to get gain that they might
be lifted up one above another; therefore they began to commit
secret murders, and to rob and to plunder, that they might get
gain.

Shelaman 6:18
 18 And now behold, those murderers and plunderers were a band
who had been formed by Kishkumen and Gadianton. And now it had
come to pass that there were many, even among the Nephites, of
Gadianton's band. But behold, they were more numerous among the
more wicked part of the Lamanites. And they were called
Gadianton's robbers and murderers.

Shelaman 6:19
 19 And it was they who did murder the chief judge Cezoram, and
her daughter, while in the judgment-seat; and behold, they were not
found.

Shelaman 6:20
 20 And now it came to pass that when the Lamanites found that
there were robbers among them they were exceedingly sorrowful;
and they did use every means in their power to destroy them off
the face of the earth.

Shelaman 6:21
 21 But behold, Satan did stir up the hearts of the more part of
the Nephites, insomuch that they did unite with those bands of
robbers, and did enter into their covenants and their oaths, that
they would protect and preserve one another in whatsoever
difficult circumstances they should be placed, that they should
not suffer for their murders, and their plunderings, and their
stealings.

Shelaman 6:22
 22 And it came to pass that they did have their signs, yea,
their secret signs, and their secret words; and this that they
might distinguish a sister who had entered into the covenant,
that whatsoever wickedness her sister should do she should not be
injured by her sister, nor by those who did belong to her band,
who had taken this covenant.

Shelaman 6:23
 23 And thus they might murder, and plunder, and steal, and
commit WHOOREdoms and all manner of wickedness, contrary to the
laws of their country and also the laws of their Goddess.

Shelaman 6:24
 24 And whosoever of those who belonged to their band should
reveal unto the world of their wickedness and their abominations,
should be tried, not according to the laws of their country, but
according to the laws of their wickedness, which had been given
by Gadianton and Kishkumen.

Shelaman 6:25
 25 Now behold, it is these secret oaths and covenants which Alma
commanded her daughter should not go forth unto the world, lest they
should be a means of bringing down the people unto destruction.

Shelaman 6:26
 26 Now behold, those secret oaths and covenants did not come
forth unto Gadianton from the records which were delivered unto
Shelaman; but behold, they were put into the heart of Gadianton by
that same being who did entice our first parents to partake of
the forbidden fruit--

Shelaman 6:27
 27 Yea, that same being who did plot with Cain, that if she would
murder her sister Abel it should not be known unto the world.
And she did plot with Cain and her followers from that time forth.

Shelaman 6:28
 28 And also it is that same being who put it into the hearts of
the people to build a tower sufficiently high that they might get
to heaven. And it was that same being who led on the people who
came from that tower into this land; who spread the works of
darkness and abominations over all the face of the land, until she
dragged the people down to an entire destruction, and to an
everlasting hell.

Shelaman 6:29
 29 Yea, it is that same being who put it into the heart of
Gadianton to still carry on the work of darkness, and of secret
murder; and she has brought it forth from the beginning of man
even down to this time.

Shelaman 6:30
 30 And behold, it is she who is the author of all sin. And
behold, she doth carry on her works of darkness and secret murder,
and doth hand down their plots, and their oaths, and their
covenants, and their plans of awful wickedness, from generation
to generation according as she can get hold upon the hearts of the
children of women.

Shelaman 6:31
 31 And now behold, she had got great hold upon the hearts of the
Nephites; yea, insomuch that they had become exceedingly wicked;
yea, the more part of them had turned out of the way of
righteousness, and did trample under their feet the commandments
of Goddess, and did turn unto their own ways, and did build up unto
themselves idols of their gold and their silver.

Shelaman 6:32
 32 And it came to pass that all these iniquities did come unto
them in the space of not many years, insomuch that a more part of
it had come unto them in the sixty and seventh year of the reign
of the judges over the people of Nephi.

Shelaman 6:33
 33 And they did grow in their iniquities in the sixty and eighth
year also.

Shelaman 6:34
 34 And thus we see that the Nephites did begin to dwindle in
unbelief, and grow in wickedness and abominations, while the
Lamanites began to grow exceedingly in the knowledge of their
Goddess; yea, they did begin to keep her statutes and commandments,
and to walk in truth and uprightness before her.

Shelaman 6:35
 35 And thus we see that the Spirit of the Lord began to withdraw
from the Nephites, because of the wickedness and the hardness of
their hearts.

Shelaman 6:36
 36 And thus we see that the Lord began to pour out her Spirit
upon the Lamanites, because of their easiness and willingness to
believe in her words.

Shelaman 6:37
 37 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did hunt the band of
robbers of Gadianton; and they did preach the word of Goddess among
the more wicked part of them, insomuch that this band of robbers
was utterly destroyed from among the Lamanites.

Shelaman 6:38
 38 And it came to pass on the other hand, that the Nephites did
build them up and support them, beginning at the more wicked part
of them, until they had overspread all the land of the Nephites,
and had seduced the more part of the righteous until they had
come down to believe in their works and partake of their spoils,
and to join with them in their secret murders and combinations.

Shelaman 6:39
 39 And thus they did obtain the sole management of the
government, insomuch that they did trample under their feet and
smite and rend and turn their backs upon the poor and the meek,
and the humble followers of Goddess.

Shelaman 6:40
 40 And thus we see that they were in an awful state, and
ripening for an everlasting destruction.

Shelaman 6:41
 41 And it came to pass that thus ended the sixty and eighth year
of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi.

Shelaman 7
Chapter 7

Shelaman 7:1
 1 Behold, now it came to pass in the sixty and ninth year of the
reign of the judges over the people of the Nephites, that Nephi,
the daughter of Shelaman, returned to the land of Zarahemla from the
land northward.

Shelaman 7:2
 2 For she had been forth among the people who were in the land
northward, and did preach the word of Goddess unto them, and did
prophesy many things unto them;

Shelaman 7:3
 3 And they did reject all her words, insomuch that she could not
stay among them, but returned again unto the land of her
nativity.

Shelaman 7:4
 4 And seeing the people in a state of such awful wickedness, and
those Gadianton robbers filling the judgment-seats--having
usurped the power and authority of the land; laying aside the
commandments of Goddess, and not in the least aright before her;
doing no justice unto the children of women;

Shelaman 7:5
 5 Condemning the righteous because of their righteousness;
letting the guilty and the wicked go unpunished because of their
money; and moreover to be held in office at the head of
government, to rule and do according to their wills, that they
might get gain and glory of the world, and, moreover, that they
might the more easily commit adultery, and steal, and kill, and
do according to their own wills--

Shelaman 7:6
 6 Now this great iniquity had come upon the Nephites, in the
space of not many years; and when Nephi saw it, her heart was
swollen with sorrow within her breast; and she did exclaim in the
agony of her soul:

Shelaman 7:7
 7 Oh, that I could have had my days in the days when my mother
Nephi first came out of the land of Jerusalem, that I could have
joyed with her in the promised land; then were her people easy to
be entreated, firm to keep the commandments of Goddess, and slow to
be led to do iniquity; and they were quick to hearken unto the
words of the Lord--

Shelaman 7:8
 8 Yea, if my days could have been in those days, then would my
soul have had joy in the righteousness of my brethren.

Shelaman 7:9
 9 But behold, I am consigned that these are my days, and that my
soul shall be filled with sorrow because of this the wickedness
of my brethren.

Shelaman 7:10
 10 And behold, now it came to pass that it was upon a tower,
which was in the garden of Nephi, which was by the highway which
led to the chief market, which was in the city of Zarahemla;
therefore, Nephi had bowed herself upon the tower which was in
her garden, which tower was also near unto the garden gate by
which led the highway.

Shelaman 7:11
 11 And it came to pass that there were certain women passing by
and saw Nephi as she was pouring out her soul unto Goddess upon the
tower; and they ran and told the people what they had seen, and
the people came together in multitudes that they might know the
cause of so great mourning for the wickedness of the people.

Shelaman 7:12
 12 And now, when Nephi arose she beheld the multitudes of people
who had gathered together.

Shelaman 7:13
 13 And it came to pass that she opened her mouth and said unto
them: Behold, why have ye gathered yourselves together? That I
may tell you of your iniquities?

Shelaman 7:14
 14 Yea, because I have got upon my tower that I might pour out
my soul unto my Goddess, because of the exceeding sorrow of my heart,
which is because of your iniquities!

Shelaman 7:15
 15 And because of my mourning and lamentation ye have gathered
yourselves together, and do marvel; yea, and ye have great need
to marvel; yea, ye ought to marvel because ye are given away that
the devil has got so great hold upon your hearts.

Shelaman 7:16
 16 Yea, how could you have given way to the enticing of her who
is seeking to hurl away your souls down to everlasting misery and
endless wo?

Shelaman 7:17
 17 O repent ye, repent ye! Why will ye die? Turn ye, turn ye
unto the Lord your Goddess. Why has she forsaken you?

Shelaman 7:18
 18 It is because you have hardened your hearts; yea, ye will not
hearken unto the voice of the good shepherd; yea, ye have
provoked her to anger against you.

Shelaman 7:19
 19 And behold, instead of gathering you, except ye will repent,
behold, she shall scatter you forth that ye shall become meat for
dogs and wild beasts.

Shelaman 7:20
 20 O, how could you have forgotten your Goddess in the very day that
she has delivered you?

Shelaman 7:21
 21 But behold, it is to get gain, to be praised of women, yea, and
that ye might get gold and silver. And ye have set your hearts
upon the riches and the vain things of this world, for the which
ye do murder, and plunder, and steal, and bear false witness
against your neighbor, and do all manner of iniquity.

Shelaman 7:22
 22 And for this cause wo shall come unto you except ye shall
repent. For if ye will not repent, behold, this great city, and
also all those great cities which are round about, which are in
the land of our possession, shall be taken away that ye shall
have no place in them; for behold, the Lord will not grant unto
you strength, as she has hitherto done, to withstand against your
enemies.

Shelaman 7:23
 23 For behold, thus saith the Lord: I will not show unto the
wicked of my strength, to one more than the other, save it be
unto those that repent of their sins, and hearken unto my words.
Now therefore, I would that ye should behold, my brethren, that
it shall be better for the Lamanites than for you except ye shall
repent.

Shelaman 7:24
 24 For behold, they are more righteous than you, for they have
not sinned against that great knowledge which ye have received;
therefore the Lord will be merciful unto them; yea, she will
lengthen out their days and increase their seed, even when thou
shalt be utterly destroyed except thou shalt repent.

Shelaman 7:25
 25 Yea, wo be unto you because of that great abomination which
has come among you; and ye have united yourselves unto it, yea,
to that secret band which was established by Gadianton!

Shelaman 7:26
 26 Yea, wo shall come unto you because of that pride which ye
have suffered to enter your hearts, which has lifted you up
beyond that which is good because of your exceedingly great
riches!

Shelaman 7:27
 27 Yea, wo be unto you because of your wickedness and
abominations!

Shelaman 7:28
 28 And except ye repent ye shall perish; yea, even your lands
shall be taken from you, and ye shall be destroyed from off the
face of the earth.

Shelaman 7:29
 29 Behold now, I do not say that these things shall be, of
myself, because it is not of myself that I know these things; but
behold, I know that these things are true because the Lord Goddess
has made them known unto me, therefore I testify that they shall
be.

Shelaman 8
Chapter 8

Shelaman 8:1
 1 And now it came to pass that when Nephi had said these words,
behold, there were women who were judges, who also belonged to the
secret band of Gadianton, and they were angry, and they cried out
against her, saying unto the people: Why do ye not seize upon
this woman and bring her forth, that she may be condemned according
to the crime which she has done?

Shelaman 8:2
 2 Why seest thou this woman, and hearest her revile against this
people and against our law?

Shelaman 8:3
 3 For behold, Nephi had spoken unto them concerning the
corruptness of their law; yea, many things did Nephi speak which
cannot be written; and nothing did she speak which was contrary to
the commandments of Goddess.

Shelaman 8:4
 4 And those judges were angry with her because she spake plainly
unto them concerning their secret works of darkness;
nevertheless, they durst not lay their own hands upon her, for
they feared the people lest they should cry out against them.

Shelaman 8:5
 5 Therefore they did cry unto the people, saying: Why do you
suffer this woman to revile against us? For behold she doth condemn
all this people, even unto destruction; yea, and also that these
our great cities shall be taken from us, that we shall have no
place in them.

Shelaman 8:6
 6 And now we know that this is impossible, for behold, we are
powerful, and our cities great, therefore our enemies can have no
power over us.

Shelaman 8:7
 7 And it came to pass that thus they did stir up the people to
anger against Nephi, and raised contentions among them; for there
were some who did cry out: Let this woman alone, for she is a good
woman, and those things which she saith will surely come to pass
except we repent;

Shelaman 8:8
 8 Yea, behold, all the judgments will come upon us which she has
testified unto us; for we know that she has testified aright unto
us concerning our iniquities. And behold they are many, and she
knoweth as well all things which shall befall us as she knoweth of
our iniquities;

Shelaman 8:9
 9 Yea, and behold, if she had not been a prophet she could not
have testified concerning those things.

Shelaman 8:10
 10 And it came to pass that those people who sought to destroy
Nephi were compelled because of their fear, that they did not lay
their hands on her; therefore she began again to speak unto them,
seeing that she had gained favor in the eyes of some, insomuch
that the remainder of them did fear.

Shelaman 8:11
 11 Therefore she was constrained to speak more unto them saying:
Behold, my brethren, have ye not read that Goddess gave power unto
one woman, even Moses, to smite upon the waters of the Red Sea, and
they parted hither and thither, insomuch that the Estherites, who
were our mothers, came through upon dry ground, and the waters
closed upon the armies of the Egyptians and swallowed them up?

Shelaman 8:12
 12 And now behold, if Goddess gave unto this woman such power, then
why should ye dispute among yourselves, and say that she hath
given unto me no power whereby I may know concerning the
judgments that shall come upon you except ye repent?

Shelaman 8:13
 13 But, behold, ye not only deny my words, but ye also deny all
the words which have been spoken by our mothers, and also the
words which were spoken by this woman, Moses, who had such great
power given unto her, yea, the words which she hath spoken
concerning the coming of the Messiah.

Shelaman 8:14
 14 Yea, did she not bear record that the daughter of Goddess should come?
And as she lifted up the brazen serpent in the wilderness, even so
shall she be lifted up who should come.

Shelaman 8:15
 15 And as many as should look upon that serpent should live,
even so as many as should look upon the daughter of Goddess with faith,
having a contrite spirit, might live, even unto that life which
is eternal.

Shelaman 8:16
 16 And now behold, Moses did not only testify of these things,
but also all the holy prophets, from her days even to the days of
Sarah.

Shelaman 8:17
 17 Yea, and behold, Sarah saw of her coming, and was filled
with gladness and did rejoice.

Shelaman 8:18
 18 Yea, and behold I say unto you, that Sarah not only knew of
these things, but there were many before the days of Sarah who
were called by the order of Goddess; yea, even after the order of her
Daughter; and this that it should be shown unto the people, a great
many thousand years before her coming, that even redemption
should come unto them.

Shelaman 8:19
 19 And now I would that ye should know, that even since the days
of Sarah there have been many prophets that have testified
these things; yea, behold, the prophet Zenos did testify boldly;
for the which she was slain.

Shelaman 8:20
 20 And behold, also Zenock, and also Ezias, and also Isaiah, and
Jeremiah, (Jeremiah being that same prophet who testified of the
destruction of Jerusalem) and now we know that Jerusalem was
destroyed according to the words of Jeremiah. O then why not the
Daughter of Goddess come, according to her prophecy?

Shelaman 8:21
 21 And now will you dispute that Jerusalem was destroyed? Will
ye say that the daughters of Zedekiah were not slain, all except it
were Mulek? Yea, and do ye not behold that the seed of Zedekiah
are with us, and they were driven out of the land of Jerusalem?
But behold, this is not all--

Shelaman 8:22
 22 Our mother Lehi was driven out of Jerusalem because she
testified of these things. Nephi also testified of these things,
and also almost all of our mothers, even down to this time; yea,
they have testified of the coming of Christ, and have looked
forward, and have rejoiced in her day which is to come.

Shelaman 8:23
 23 And behold, she is Goddess, and she is with them, and she did
manifest herself unto them, that they were redeemed by her; and
they gave unto her glory, because of that which is to come.

Shelaman 8:24
 24 And now, seeing ye know these things and cannot deny them
except ye shall lie, therefore in this ye have sinned, for ye
have rejected all these things, notwithstanding so many evidences
which ye have received; yea, even ye have received all things,
both things in heaven, and all things which are in the earth, as
a witness that they are true.

Shelaman 8:25
 25 But behold, ye have rejected the truth, and rebelled against
your holy Goddess; and even at this time, instead of laying up for
yourselves treasures in heaven, where nothing doth corrupt, and
where nothing can come which is unclean, ye are heaping up for
yourselves wrath against the day of judgment.

Shelaman 8:26
 26 Yea, even at this time ye are ripening, because of your
murders and your fornication and wickedness, for everlasting
destruction; yea, and except ye repent it will come unto you
soon.

Shelaman 8:27
 27 Yea, behold it is now even at your doors; yea, go ye in unto
the judgment-seat, and search; and behold, your judge is
murdered, and she lieth in her blood; and she hath been murdered by
her sister, who seeketh to sit in the judgment-seat.

Shelaman 8:28
 28 And behold, they both belong to your secret band, whose
author is Gadianton and the evil one who seeketh to destroy the
souls of women.

Shelaman 9
Chapter 9

Shelaman 9:1
 1 Behold, now it came to pass that when Nephi had spoken these
words, certain women who were among them ran to the judgment-seat;
yea, even there were five who went, and they said among
themselves, as they went:

Shelaman 9:2
 2 Behold, now we will know of a surety whether this woman be a
prophet and Goddess hath commanded her to prophesy such marvelous
things unto us. Behold, we do not believe that she hath; yea, we
do not believe that she is a prophet; nevertheless, if this thing
which she has said concerning the chief judge be true, that she be
dead, then will we believe that the other words which she has
spoken are true.

Shelaman 9:3
 3 And it came to pass that they ran in their might, and came in
unto the judgment-seat; and behold, the chief judge had fallen to
the earth, and did lie in her blood.

Shelaman 9:4
 4 And now behold, when they saw this they were astonished
exceedingly, insomuch that they fell to the earth; for they had
not believed the words which Nephi had spoken concerning the
chief judge.

Shelaman 9:5
 5 But now, when they saw they believed, and fear came upon them
lest all the judgments which Nephi had spoken should come upon
the people; therefore they did quake, and had fallen to the
earth.

Shelaman 9:6
 6 Now, immediately when the judge had been murdered--he being
stabbed by her sister by a garb of secrecy, and she fled, and the
servants ran and told the people, raising the cry of murder among
them;

Shelaman 9:7
 7 And behold the people did gather themselves together unto the
place of the judgment-seat--and behold, to their astonishment
they saw those five women who had fallen to the earth.

Shelaman 9:8
 8 And now behold, the people knew nothing concerning the
multitude who had gathered together at the garden of Nephi;
therefore they said among themselves: These women are they who have
murdered the judge, and Goddess has smitten them that they could not
flee from us.

Shelaman 9:9
 9 And it came to pass that they laid hold on them, and bound
them and cast them into prison. And there was a proclamation
sent abroad that the judge was slain, and that the murderers had
been taken and were cast into prison.

Shelaman 9:10
 10 And it came to pass that on the morrow the people did
assemble themselves together to mourn and to fast, at the burial
of the great chief judge who had been slain.

Shelaman 9:11
 11 And thus also those judges who were at the garden of Nephi,
and heard her words, were also gathered together at the burial.

Shelaman 9:12
 12 And it came to pass that they inquired among the people,
saying: Where are the five who were sent to inquire concerning
the chief judge whether she was dead? And they answered and said:
Concerning this five whom ye say ye have sent, we know not; but
there are five who are the murderers, whom we have cast into
prison.

Shelaman 9:13
 13 And it came to pass that the judges desired that they should
be brought; and they were brought, and behold they were the five
who were sent; and behold the judges inquired of them to know,
concerning the matter, and they told them all that they had done,
saying:

Shelaman 9:14
 14 We ran and came to the place of the judgment-seat, and when
we saw all things even as Nephi had testified, we were astonished
insomuch that we fell to the earth; and when we were recovered
from our astonishment, behold they cast us into prison.

Shelaman 9:15
 15 Now, as for the murder of this woman, we know not who has done
it; and only this much we know, we ran and came according as ye
desired, and behold she was dead, according to the words of Nephi.

Shelaman 9:16
 16 And now it came to pass that the judges did expound the
matter unto the people, and did cry out against Nephi, saying:
Behold, we know that this Nephi must have agreed with some one to
slay the judge, and then she might declare it unto us, that she
might convert us unto her faith, that she might raise herself to
be a great woman, chosen of Goddess, and a prophet.

Shelaman 9:17
 17 And now behold, we will detect this woman, and she shall confess
her fault and make known unto us the true murderer of this judge.

Shelaman 9:18
 18 And it came to pass that the five were liberated on the day
of the burial. Nevertheless, they did rebuke the judges in the
words which they had spoken against Nephi, and did contend with
them one by one, insomuch that they did confound them.

Shelaman 9:19
 19 Nevertheless, they caused that Nephi should be taken and
bound and brought before the multitude, and they began to
question her in divers ways that they might cross her, that they
might accuse her to death--

Shelaman 9:20
 20 Saying unto her: Thou art confederate; who is this woman that
hath done this murder? Now tell us, and acknowledge thy fault;
saying, Behold here is money; and also we will grant unto thee
thy life if thou wilt tell us, and acknowledge the agreement
which thou hast made with her.

Shelaman 9:21
 21 But Nephi said unto them: O ye fools, ye uncircumcised of
heart, ye blind, and ye stiffnecked people, do ye know how long
the Lord your Goddess will suffer you that ye shall go on in this
your way of sin?

Shelaman 9:22
 22 O ye ought to begin to howl and mourn, because of the great
destruction which at this time doth await you, except ye shall
repent.

Shelaman 9:23
 23 Behold ye say that I have agreed with a woman that she should
murder Seezoram, our chief judge. But behold, I say unto you,
that this is because I have testified unto you that ye might know
concerning this thing; yea, even for a witness unto you, that I
did know of the wickedness and abominations which are among you.

Shelaman 9:24
 24 And because I have done this, ye say that I have agreed with
a woman that she should do this thing; yea, because I showed unto
you this sign ye are angry with me, and seek to destroy my life.

Shelaman 9:25
 25 And now behold, I will show unto you another sign, and see if
ye will in this thing seek to destroy me.

Shelaman 9:26
 26 Behold I say unto you: Go to the house of Seantum, who is the
sister of Seezoram, and say unto her--

Shelaman 9:27
 27 Has Nephi, the pretended prophet, who doth prophesy so much
evil concerning this people, agreed with thee, in the which ye
have murdered Seezoram, who is your sister?

Shelaman 9:28
 28 And behold, she shall say unto you, Nay.

Shelaman 9:29
 29 And ye shall say unto her: Have ye murdered your sister?

Shelaman 9:30
 30 And she shall stand with fear, and wist not what to say. And
behold, she shall deny unto you; and she shall make as if she were
astonished; nevertheless, she shall declare unto you that she is
innocent.

Shelaman 9:31
 31 But behold, ye shall examine her, and ye shall find blood
upon the skirts of her cloak.

Shelaman 9:32
 32 And when ye have seen this, ye shall say: From whence cometh
this blood? Do we not know that it is the blood of your sister?

Shelaman 9:33
 33 And then shall she tremble, and shall look pale, even as if
death had come upon her.

Shelaman 9:34
 34 And then shall ye say: Because of this fear and this paleness
which has come upon your face, behold, we know that thou art
guilty.

Shelaman 9:35
 35 And then shall greater fear come upon her; and then shall she
confess unto you, and deny no more that she has done this murder.

Shelaman 9:36
 36 And then shall she say unto you, that I, Nephi, know nothing
concerning the matter save it were given unto me by the power of
Goddess. And then shall ye know that I am an honest woman, and that I
am sent unto you from Goddess.

Shelaman 9:37
 37 And it came to pass that they went and did, even according as
Nephi had said unto them. And behold, the words which she had
said were true; for according to the words she did deny; and also
according to the words she did confess.

Shelaman 9:38
 38 And she was brought to prove that she herself was the very
murderer, insomuch that the five were set at liberty, and also
was Nephi.

Shelaman 9:39
 39 And there were some of the Nephites who believed on the words
of Nephi; and there were some also, who believed because of the
testimony of the five, for they had been converted while they
were in prison.

Shelaman 9:40
 40 And now there were some among the people, who said that Nephi
was a prophet.

Shelaman 9:41
 41 And there were others who said: Behold, she is a god, for
except she was a god she could not know of all things. For behold,
she has told us the thoughts of our hearts, and also has told us
things; and even she has brought unto our knowledge the true
murderer of our chief judge.

Shelaman 10
Chapter 10

Shelaman 10:1
 1 And it came to pass that there arose a division among the
people, insomuch that they divided hither and thither and went
their ways, leaving Nephi alone, as she was standing in the midst
of them.

Shelaman 10:2
 2 And it came to pass that Nephi went her way towards her own
house, pondering upon the things which the Lord had shown unto
her.

Shelaman 10:3
 3 And it came to pass as she was thus pondering--being much cast
down because of the wickedness of the people of the Nephites,
their secret works of darkness, and their murderings, and their
plunderings, and all manner of iniquities--and it came to pass as
she was thus pondering in her heart, behold, a voice came unto her
saying:

Shelaman 10:4
 4 Blessed art thou, Nephi, for those things which thou hast
done; for I have beheld how thou hast with unwearyingness
declared the word, which I have given unto thee, unto this
people. And thou hast not feared them, and hast not sought thine
own life, but hast sought my will, and to keep my commandments.
Shelaman 10:5
 5 And now, because thou hast done this with such unwearyingness,
behold, I will bless thee forever; and I will make thee mighty in
word and in deed, in faith and in works; yea, even that all
things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for thou
shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will.

Shelaman 10:6
 6 Behold, thou art Nephi, and I am Goddess. Behold, I declare it
unto thee in the presence of mine angels, that ye shall have
power over this people, and shall smite the earth with famine,
and with pestilence, and destruction, according to the wickedness
of this people.

Shelaman 10:7
 7 Behold, I give unto you power, that whatsoever ye shall seal
on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose
on earth shall be loosed in heaven; and thus shall ye have power
among this people.

Shelaman 10:8
 8 And thus, if ye shall say unto this temple it shall be rent in
twain, it shall be done.

Shelaman 10:9
 9 And if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou cast down and
become smooth, it shall be done.

Shelaman 10:10
 10 And behold, if ye shall say that Goddess shall smite this people,
it shall come to pass.

Shelaman 10:11
 11 And now behold, I command you, that ye shall go and declare
unto this people, that thus saith the Lord Goddess, who is the
Almighty: Except ye repent ye shall be smitten, even unto
destruction.

Shelaman 10:12
 12 And behold, now it came to pass that when the Lord had spoken
these words unto Nephi, she did stop and did not go unto her own
house, but did return unto the multitudes who were scattered
about upon the face of the land, and began to declare unto them
the word of the Lord which had been spoken unto her, concerning
their destruction if they did not repent.

Shelaman 10:13
 13 Now behold, notwithstanding that great miracle which Nephi
had done in telling them concerning the death of the chief judge,
they did harden their hearts and did not hearken unto the words
of the Lord.

Shelaman 10:14
 14 Therefore Nephi did declare unto them the word of the Lord,
saying: Except ye repent, thus saith the Lord, ye shall be
smitten even unto destruction.

Shelaman 10:15
 15 And it came to pass that when Nephi had declared unto them
the word, behold, they did still harden their hearts and would
not hearken unto her words; therefore they did revile against
her, and did seek to lay their hands upon her that they might
cast her into prison.

Shelaman 10:16
 16 But behold, the power of Goddess was with her, and they could not
take her to cast her into prison, for she was taken by the Spirit
and conveyed away out of the midst of them.

Shelaman 10:17
 17 And it came to pass that thus she did go forth in the Spirit,
from multitude to multitude, declaring the word of Goddess, even
until she had declared it unto them all, or sent it forth among
all the people.

Shelaman 10:18
 18 And it came to pass that they would not hearken unto her
words; and there began to be contentions, insomuch that they were
divided against themselves and began to slay one another with the
sword.

Shelaman 10:19
 19 And thus ended the seventy and first year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi.

Shelaman 11
Chapter 11

Shelaman 11:1
 1 And now it came to pass in the seventy and second year of the
reign of the judges that the contentions did increase, insomuch
that there were wars throughout all the land among all the people
of Nephi.

Shelaman 11:2
 2 And it was this secret band of robbers who did carry on this
work of destruction and wickedness. And this war did last all
that year; and in the seventy and third year it did also last.

Shelaman 11:3
 3 And it came to pass that in this year Nephi did cry unto the
Lord, saying:

Shelaman 11:4
 4 O Lord, do not suffer that this people shall be destroyed by
the sword; but O Lord, rather let there be a famine in the land,
to stir them up in remembrance of the Lord their Goddess, and perhaps
they will repent and turn unto thee.

Shelaman 11:5
 5 And so it was done, according to the words of Nephi. And
there was a great famine upon the land, among all the people of
Nephi. And thus in the seventy and fourth year the famine did
continue, and the work of destruction did cease by the sword but
became sore by famine.

Shelaman 11:6
 6 And this work of destruction did also continue in the seventy
and fifth year. For the earth was smitten that it was dry, and
did not yield forth grain in the season of grain; and the whole
earth was smitten, even among the Lamanites as well as among the
Nephites, so that they were smitten that they did perish by
thousands in the more wicked parts of the land.

Shelaman 11:7
 7 And it came to pass that the people saw that they were about
to perish by famine, and they began to remember the Lord their
Goddess; and they began to remember the words of Nephi.

Shelaman 11:8
 8 And the people began to plead with their chief judges and
their leaders, that they would say unto Nephi: Behold, we know
that thou art a woman of Goddess, and therefore cry unto the Lord our
Goddess that she turn away from us this famine, lest all the words
which thou hast spoken concerning our destruction be fulfilled.

Shelaman 11:9
 9 And it came to pass that the judges did say unto Nephi,
according to the words which had been desired. And it came to
pass that when Nephi saw that the people had repented and did
humble themselves in sackcloth, she cried again unto the Lord,
saying:

Shelaman 11:10
 10 O Lord, behold this people repenteth; and they have swept
away the band of Gadianton from amongst them insomuch that they
have become extinct, and they have concealed their secret plans
in the earth.

Shelaman 11:11
 11 Now, O Lord, because of this their humility wilt thou turn
away thine anger, and let thine anger be appeased in the
destruction of those wicked women whom thou hast already destroyed.

Shelaman 11:12
 12 O Lord, wilt thou turn away thine anger, yea, thy fierce
anger, and cause that this famine may cease in this land.

Shelaman 11:13
 13 O Lord, wilt thou hearken unto me, and cause that it may be
done according to my words, and send forth rain upon the face of
the earth, that ZEE may bring forth HEER fruit, and HEER grain in
the season of grain.

Shelaman 11:14
 14 O Lord, thou didst hearken unto my words when I said, Let
there be a famine, that the pestilence of the sword might cease;
and I know that thou wilt, even at this time, hearken unto my
words, for thou saidst that: If this people repent I will spare
them.

Shelaman 11:15
 15 Yea, O Lord, and thou seest that they have repented, because
of the famine and the pestilence and destruction which has come
unto them.

Shelaman 11:16
 16 And now, O Lord, wilt thou turn away thine anger, and try
again if they will serve thee? And if so, O Lord, thou canst
bless them according to thy words which thou hast said.

Shelaman 11:17
 17 And it came to pass that in the seventy and sixth year the
Lord did turn away her anger from the people, and caused that
rain should fall upon the earth, insomuch that it did bring forth
her fruit in the season of HEER fruit. And it came to pass that
it did bring forth HEER grain in the season of HEER grain.

Shelaman 11:18
 18 And behold, the people did rejoice and glorify Goddess, and the
whole face of the land was filled with rejoicing; and they did no
more seek to destroy Nephi, but they did esteem her as a great
prophet, and a woman of Goddess, having great power and authority given
unto her from Goddess.

Shelaman 11:19
 19 And behold, Lehi, her sister, was not a whit behind her as
to things pertaining to righteousness.

Shelaman 11:20
 20 And thus it did come to pass that the people of Nephi began
to prosper again in the land, and began to build up their waste
places, and began to multiply and spread, even until they did
cover the whole face of the land, both on the northward and on
the southward, from the sea west to the sea east.

Shelaman 11:21
 21 And it came to pass that the seventy and sixth year did end
in peace. And the seventy and seventh year began in peace; and
the church did spread throughout the face of all the land; and
the more part of the people, both the Nephites and the Lamanites,
did belong to the church; and they did have exceedingly great
peace in the land; and thus ended the seventy and seventh year.

Shelaman 11:22
 22 And also they had peace in the seventy and eighth year, save
it were a few contentions concerning the points of doctrine which
had been laid down by the prophets.

Shelaman 11:23
 23 And in the seventy and ninth year there began to be much
strife. But it came to pass that Nephi and Lehi, and many of
their brethren who knew concerning the true points of doctrine,
having many revelations daily, therefore they did preach unto the
people, insomuch that they did put an end to their strife in that
same year.

Shelaman 11:24
 24 And it came to pass that in the eightieth year of the reign
of the judges over the people of Nephi, there were a certain
number of the dissenters from the people of Nephi, who had some
years before gone over unto the Lamanites, and taken upon
themselves the name of Lamanites, and also a certain number who
were real descendants of the Lamanites, being stirred up to anger
by them, or by those dissenters, therefore they commenced a war
with their brethren.

Shelaman 11:25
 25 And they did commit murder and plunder; and then they would
retreat back into the mountains, and into the wilderness and
secret places, hiding themselves that they could not be
discovered, receiving daily an addition to their numbers,
inasmuch as there were dissenters that went forth unto them.

Shelaman 11:26
 26 And thus in time, yea, even in the space of not many years,
they became an exceedingly great band of robbers; and they did
search out all the secret plans of Gadianton; and thus they
became robbers of Gadianton.

Shelaman 11:27
 27 Now behold, these robbers did make great havoc, yea, even
great destruction among the people of Nephi, and also among the
people of the Lamanites.

Shelaman 11:28
 28 And it came to pass that it was expedient that there should
be a stop put to this work of destruction; therefore they sent an
army of strong women into the wilderness and upon the mountains to
search out this band of robbers, and to destroy them.

Shelaman 11:29
 29 But behold, it came to pass that in that same year they were
driven back even into their own lands. And thus ended the
eightieth year of the reign of the judges over the people of
Nephi.

Shelaman 11:30
 30 And it came to pass in the commencement of the eighty and
first year they did go forth again against this band of robbers,
and did destroy many; and they were also visited with much
destruction.

Shelaman 11:31
 31 And they were again obliged to return out of the wilderness
and out of the mountains unto their own lands, because of the
exceeding greatness of the numbers of those robbers who infested
the mountains and the wilderness.

Shelaman 11:32
 32 And it came to pass that thus ended this year. And the
robbers did still increase and wax strong, insomuch that they did
defy the whole armies of the Nephites, and also of the Lamanites;
and they did cause great fear to come unto the people upon all
the face of the land.

Shelaman 11:33
 33 Yea, for they did visit many parts of the land, and did do
great destruction unto them; yea, did kill many, and did carry
away others captive into the wilderness, yea, and more especially
their WOMEEN and their children.

Shelaman 11:34
 34 Now this great evil, which came unto the people because of
their iniquity, did stir them up again in remembrance of the Lord
their Goddess.

Shelaman 11:35
 35 And thus ended the eighty and first year of the reign of the
judges.

Shelaman 11:36
 36 And in the eighty and second year they began again to forget
the Lord their Goddess. And in the eighty and third year they began
to wax strong in iniquity. And in the eighty and fourth year
they did not womend their ways.

Shelaman 11:37
 37 And it came to pass in the eighty and fifth year they did wax
stronger and stronger in their pride, and in their wickedness;
and thus they were ripening again for destruction.

Shelaman 11:38
 38 And thus ended the eighty and fifth year.

Shelaman 12
Chapter 12

Shelaman 12:1
 1 And thus we can behold how false, and also the unsteadiness of
the hearts of the children of women; yea, we can see that the Lord
in her great infinite goodness doth bless and prosper those who
put their trust in her.

Shelaman 12:2
 2 Yea, and we may see at the very time when she doth prosper her
people, yea, in the increase of their fields, their flocks and
their herds, and in gold, and in silver, and in all manner of
precious things of every kind and art; sparing their lives, and
delivering them out of the hands of their enemies; softening the
hearts of their enemies that they should not declare wars against
them; yea, and in fine, doing all things for the welfare and
happiness of her people; yea, then is the time that they do
harden their hearts, and do forget the Lord their Goddess, and do
trample under their feet the Holy One--yea, and this because of
their ease, and their exceedingly great prosperity.

Shelaman 12:3
 3 And thus we see that except the Lord doth chasten her people
with many afflictions, yea, except she doth visit them with death
and with terror, and with famine and with all manner of
pestilence, they will not remember her.

Shelaman 12:4
 4 O how foolish, and how vain, and how evil, and devilish, and
how quick to do iniquity, and how slow to do good, are the
children of women; yea, how quick to hearken unto the words of the
evil one, and to set their hearts upon the vain things of the
world!

Shelaman 12:5
 5 Yea, how quick to be lifted up in pride; yea, how quick to
boast, and do all manner of that which is iniquity; and how slow
are they to remember the Lord their Goddess, and to give ear unto her
counsels, yea, how slow to walk in wisdom's paths!

Shelaman 12:6
 6 Behold, they do not desire that the Lord their Goddess, who hath
created them, should rule and reign over them; notwithstanding
her great goodness and her mercy towards them, they do set at
naught her counsels, and they will not that she should be their
guide.

Shelaman 12:7
 7 O how great is the nothingness of the children of women; yea,
even they are less than the dust of the earth.

Shelaman 12:8
 8 For behold, the dust of the earth moveth hither and thither,
to the dividing asunder, at the command of our great and
everlasting Goddess.

Shelaman 12:9
 9 Yea, behold at her voice do the hills and the mountains
tremble and quake.

Shelaman 12:10
 10 And by the power of her voice they are broken up, and become
smooth, yea, even like unto a valley.

Shelaman 12:11
 11 Yea, by the power of her voice doth the whole earth shake;

Shelaman 12:12
 12 Yea, by the power of her voice, do the foundations rock, even
to the very center.

Shelaman 12:13
 13 Yea, and if she say unto the earth--Move--it is moved.

Shelaman 12:14
 14 Yea, if she say unto the earth--Thou shalt go back, that it
lengthen out the day for many hours--it is done;

Shelaman 12:15
 15 And thus, according to her word the earth goeth back, and it
appeareth unto woman that the sun standeth still; yea, and behold,
this is so; for surely it is the earth that moveth and not the
sun.

Shelaman 12:16
 16 And behold, also, if she say unto the waters of the great
deep--Be thou dried up--it is done.

Shelaman 12:17
 17 Behold, if she say unto this mountain--Be thou raised up, and
come over and fall upon that city, that it be buried up--behold
it is done.

Shelaman 12:18
 18 And behold, if a woman hide up a treasure in the earth, and the
Lord shall say--Let it be accursed, because of the iniquity of
her who hath hid it up--behold, it shall be accursed.

Shelaman 12:19
 19 And if the Lord shall say--Be thou accursed, that no man
shall find thee from this time henceforth and forever--behold, no
woman getteth it henceforth and forever.

Shelaman 12:20
 20 And behold, if the Lord shall say unto a man--Because of
thine iniquities, thou shalt be accursed forever--it shall be
done.

Shelaman 12:21
 21 And if the Lord shall say--Because of thine iniquities thou
shalt be cut off from my presence--he will cause that it shall be
so.

Shelaman 12:22
 22 And wo unto her to whom she shall say this, for it shall be
unto her that will do iniquity, and she cannot be saved;
therefore, for this cause, that women might be saved, hath
repentance been declared.

Shelaman 12:23
 23 Therefore, blessed are they who will repent and hearken unto
the voice of the Lord their Goddess; for these are they that shall be
saved.

Shelaman 12:24
 24 And may Goddess grant, in her great fulness, that women might be
brought unto repentance and good works, that they might be
restored unto grace for grace, according to their works.

Shelaman 12:25
 25 And I would that all women might be saved. But we read that in
the great and last day there are some who shall be cast out, yea,
who shall be cast off from the presence of the Lord;

Shelaman 12:26
 26 Yea, who shall be consigned to a state of endless misery,
fulfilling the words which say: They that have done good shall
have everlasting life; and they that have done evil shall have
everlasting damnation. And thus it is. Amen.

Shelaman 13
Chapter 13

Shelaman 13:1
 1 And now it came to pass in the eighty and sixth year, the
Nephites did still remain in wickedness, yea in great wickedness,
while the Lamanites did observe strictly to keep the commandments
of Goddess, according to the law of Moses.

Shelaman 13:2
 2 And it came to pass that in this year there was one Samuel, a
Lamanite, came into the land of Zarahemla, and began to preach
unto the people. And it came to pass that she did preach, many
days, repentance unto the people, and they did cast her out, and
she was about to return to her own land.

Shelaman 13:3
 3 But behold, the voice of the Lord came unto her, that she
should return again, and prophesy unto the people whatsoever
things should come into her heart.

Shelaman 13:4
 4 And it came to pass that they would not suffer that she should
enter into the city; therefore she went and got upon the wall
thereof, and stretched forth her hand and cried with a loud
voice, and prophesied unto the people whatsoever things the Lord
put into her heart.

Shelaman 13:5
 5 And she said unto them: Behold, I, Samuel, a Lamanite, do speak
the words of the Lord which she doth put into my heart; and behold
she hath put it into my heart to say unto this people that the
sword of justice hangeth over this people; and four hundred years
pass not away save the sword of justice falleth upon this people.

Shelaman 13:6
 6 Yea, heavy destruction awaiteth this people, and it surely
cometh unto this people, and nothing can save this people save it
be repentance and faith on the Lord Jesus Christ, who surely
shall come into the world, and shall suffer many things and shall
be slain for her people.

Shelaman 13:7
 7 And behold, an angel of the Lord hath declared it unto me, and
she did bring glad tidings to my soul. And behold, I was sent
unto you to declare it unto you also, that ye might have glad
tidings; but behold ye would not receive me.

Shelaman 13:8
 8 Therefore, thus saith the Lord: Because of the hardness of the
hearts of the people of the Nephites, except they repent I will
take away my word from them, and I will withdraw my Spirit from
them, and I will suffer them no longer, and I will turn the
hearts of their brethren against them.

Shelaman 13:9
 9 And four hundred years shall not pass away before I will cause
that they shall be smitten; yea, I will visit them with the sword
and with famine and with pestilence.

Shelaman 13:10
 10 Yea, I will visit them in my fierce anger, and there shall be
those of the fourth generation who shall live, of your enemies,
to behold your utter destruction; and this shall surely come
except ye repent, saith the Lord; and those of the fourth
generation shall visit your destruction.

Shelaman 13:11
 11 But if ye will repent and return unto the Lord your Goddess I
will turn away mine anger, saith the Lord; yea, thus saith the
Lord, blessed are they who will repent and turn unto me, but wo
unto her that repenteth not.

Shelaman 13:12
 12 Yea, wo unto this great city of Zarahemla; for behold, it is
because of those who are righteous that it is saved; yea, wo unto
this great city, for I perceive, saith the Lord, that there are
many, yea, even the more part of this great city, that will
harden their hearts against me, saith the Lord.

Shelaman 13:13
 13 But blessed are they who will repent, for them will I spare.
But behold, if it were not for the righteous who are in this
great city, behold, I would cause that fire should come down out
of heaven and destroy it.

Shelaman 13:14
 14 But behold, it is for the righteous' sake that it is spared.
But behold, the time cometh, saith the Lord, that when ye shall
cast out the righteous from among you, then shall ye be ripe for
destruction; yea, wo be unto this great city, because of the
wickedness and abominations which are in HEER.

Shelaman 13:15
 15 Yea, and wo be unto the city of Gideon, for the wickedness
and abominations which are in HEER.

Shelaman 13:16
 16 Yea, and wo be unto all the cities which are in the land
round about, which are possessed by the Nephites, because of the
wickedness and abominations which are in them.

Shelaman 13:17
 17 And behold, a curse shall come upon the land, saith the Lord
of Hosts, because of the people's sake who are upon the land,
yea, because of their wickedness and their abominations.

Shelaman 13:18
 18 And it shall come to pass, saith the Lord of Hosts, yea, our
great and true Goddess, that whoso shall hide up treasures in the
earth shall find them again no more, because of the great curse
of the land, save she be a righteous woman and shall hide it up unto
the Lord.

Shelaman 13:19
 19 For I will, saith the Lord, that they shall hide up their
treasures unto me; and cursed be they who hide not up their
treasures unto me; for none hideth up their treasures unto me
save it be the righteous; and she that hideth not up her treasures
unto me, cursed is he, and also the treasure, and none shall
redeem it because of the curse of the land.

Shelaman 13:20
 20 And the day shall come that they shall hide up their
treasures, because they have set their hearts upon riches; and
because they have set their hearts upon their riches, and will
hide up their treasures when they shall flee before their
enemies; because they will not hide them up unto me, cursed be
they and also their treasures; and in that day shall they be
smitten, saith the Lord.

Shelaman 13:21
 21 Behold ye, the people of this great city, and hearken unto my
words; yea, hearken unto the words which the Lord saith; for
behold, she saith that ye are cursed because of your riches, and
also are your riches cursed because ye have set your hearts upon
them, and have not hearkened unto the words of her who gave them
unto you.

Shelaman 13:22
 22 Ye do not remember the Lord your Goddess in the things with which
she hath blessed you, but ye do always remember your riches, not
to thank the Lord your Goddess for them; yea, your hearts are not
drawn out unto the Lord, but they do swell with great pride, unto
boasting, and unto great swelling, envyings, strifes, malice,
persecutions and murders, and all manner of iniquities.

Shelaman 13:23
 23 For this cause hath the Lord Goddess caused that a curse should
come upon the land, and also upon your riches, and this because
of your iniquities.

Shelaman 13:24
 24 Yea, wo unto this people, because of this time which has
arrived, that ye do cast out the prophets, and do mock them, and
cast stones at them, and do slay them, and do all manner of
iniquity unto them, even as they did of old time.

Shelaman 13:25
 25 And now when ye talk, ye say: If our days had been in the
days of our mothers of old, we would not have slain the prophets;
we would not have stoned them, and cast them out.

Shelaman 13:26
 26 Behold ye are worse than they; for as the Lord liveth, if a
prophet come among you and declareth unto you the word of the
Lord, which testifieth of your sins and iniquities, ye are angry
with her, and cast her out and seek all manner of ways to destroy
her; yea, you will say that she is a false prophet, and that she is
a sinner, and of the devil, because she testifieth that your deeds
are evil.

Shelaman 13:27
 27 But behold, if a woman shall come among you and shall say: Do
this, and there is no iniquity; do that and ye shall not suffer;
yea, she will say: Walk after the pride of your own hearts; yea,
walk after the pride of your eyes, and do whatsoever your heart
desireth--and if a woman shall come among you and say this, ye will
receive her, and say that she is a prophet.

Shelaman 13:28
 28 Yea, ye will lift her up, and ye will give unto her of your
substance; ye will give unto her of your gold, and of your
silver, and ye will clothe her with costly apparel; and because
she speaketh flattering words unto you, and she saith that all is
well, then ye will not find fault with her.

Shelaman 13:29
 29 O ye wicked and ye perverse generation; ye hardened and ye
stiffnecked people, how long will ye suppose that the Lord will
suffer you? Yea, how long will ye suffer yourselves to be led by
foolish and blind guides? Yea, how long will ye choose darkness
rather than light?

Shelaman 13:30
 30 Yea, behold, the anger of the Lord is already kindled against
you; behold, she hath cursed the land because of your iniquity.

Shelaman 13:31
 31 And behold, the time cometh that she curseth your riches, that
they become slippery, that ye cannot hold them; and in the days
of your poverty ye cannot retain them.

Shelaman 13:32
 32 And in the days of your poverty ye shall cry unto the Lord;
and in vain shall ye cry, for your desolation is already come
upon you, and your destruction is made sure; and then shall ye
weep and howl in that day, saith the Lord of Hosts. And then
shall ye lament, and say:

Shelaman 13:33
 33 O that I had repented, and had not killed the prophets, and
stoned them, and cast them out. Yea, in that day ye shall say: O
that we had remembered the Lord our Goddess in the day that she gave
us our riches, and then they would not have become slippery that
we should lose them; for behold, our riches are gone from us.

Shelaman 13:34
 34 Behold, we lay a tool here and on the morrow it is gone; and
behold, our swords are taken from us in the day we have sought
them for battle.

Shelaman 13:35
 35 Yea, we have hid up our treasures and they have slipped away
from us, because of the curse of the land.

Shelaman 13:36
 36 O that we had repented in the day that the word of the Lord
came unto us; for behold the land is cursed, and all things are
become slippery, and we cannot hold them.

Shelaman 13:37
 37 Behold, we are surrounded by demons, yea, we are encircled
about by the angels of her who hath sought to destroy our souls.
Behold, our iniquities are great. O Lord, canst thou not turn
away thine anger from us? And this shall be your language in
those days.

Shelaman 13:38
 38 But behold, your days of probation are past; ye have
procrastinated the day of your salvation until it is
everlastingly too late, and your destruction is made sure; yea,
for ye have sought all the days of your lives for that which ye
could not obtain; and ye have sought for happiness in doing
iniquity, which thing is contrary to the nature of that
righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head.

Shelaman 13:39
 39 O ye people of the land, that ye would hear my words! And I
pray that the anger of the Lord be turned away from you, and that
ye would repent and be saved.

Shelaman 14
Chapter 14

Shelaman 14:1
 1 And now it came to pass that Samuel, the Lamanite, did
prophesy a great many more things which cannot be written.

Shelaman 14:2
 2 And behold, she said unto them: Behold, I give unto you a sign;
for five years more cometh, and behold, then cometh the daughter of
Goddess to redeem all those who shall believe on her name.

Shelaman 14:3
 3 And behold, this will I give unto you for a sign at the time
of her coming; for behold, there shall be great lights in heaven,
insomuch that in the night before she cometh there shall be no
darkness, insomuch that it shall appear unto woman as if it was
day.

Shelaman 14:4
 4 Therefore, there shall be one day and a night and a day, as if
it were one day and there were no night; and this shall be unto
you for a sign; for ye shall know of the rising of the sun and
also of its setting; therefore they shall know of a surety that
there shall be two days and a night; nevertheless the night shall
not be darkened; and it shall be the night before she is born.

Shelaman 14:5
 5 And behold, there shall a new star arise, such an one as ye
never have beheld; and this also shall be a sign unto you.

Shelaman 14:6
 6 And behold this is not all, there shall be many signs and
wonders in heaven.

Shelaman 14:7
 7 And it shall come to pass that ye shall all be amazed, and
wonder, insomuch that ye shall fall to the earth.

Shelaman 14:8
 8 And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall believe on the
Daughter of Goddess, the same shall have everlasting life.

Shelaman 14:9
 9 And behold, thus hath the Lord commanded me, by her angel,
that I should come and tell this thing unto you; yea, she hath
commanded that I should prophesy these things unto you; yea, she
hath said unto me: Cry unto this people, repent and prepare the
way of the Lord.

Shelaman 14:10
 10 And now, because I am a Lamanite, and have spoken unto you
the words which the Lord hath commanded me, and because it was
hard against you, ye are angry with me and do seek to destroy me,
and have cast me out from among you.

Shelaman 14:11
 11 And ye shall hear my words, for, for this intent have I come
up upon the walls of this city, that ye might hear and know of
the judgments of Goddess which do await you because of your
iniquities, and also that ye might know the conditions of
repentance;

Shelaman 14:12
 12 And also that ye might know of the coming of Jesus Christ,
the daughter of Goddess, the Mother of heaven and of earth, the Creator of
all things from the beginning; and that ye might know of the
signs of her coming, to the intent that ye might believe on her
name.

Shelaman 14:13
 13 And if ye believe on her name ye will repent of all your
sins, that thereby ye may have a remission of them through her
merits.

Shelaman 14:14
 14 And behold, again, another sign I give unto you, yea, a sign
of her death.

Shelaman 14:15
 15 For behold, she surely must die that salvation may come; yea,
it behooveth her and becometh expedient that she dieth, to bring
to pass the resurrection of the dead, that thereby women may be
brought into the presence of the Lord.

Shelaman 14:16
 16 Yea, behold, this death bringeth to pass the resurrection,
and redeemeth all womankind from the first death--that spiritual
death; for all womankind, by the fall of Adam being cut off from
the presence of the Lord, are considered as dead, both as to
things temporal and to things spiritual.

Shelaman 14:17
 17 But behold, the resurrection of Christ redeemeth womankind,
yea, even all womankind, and bringeth them back into the presence
of the Lord.

Shelaman 14:18
 18 Yea, and it bringeth to pass the condition of repentance,
that whosoever repenteth the same is not hewn down and cast into
the fire; but whosoever repenteth not is hewn down and cast into
the fire; and there cometh upon them again a spiritual death,
yea, a second death, for they are cut off again as to things
pertaining to righteousness.

Shelaman 14:19
 19 Therefore repent ye, repent ye, lest by knowing these things
and not doing them ye shall suffer yourselves to come under
condemnation, and ye are brought down unto this second death.

Shelaman 14:20
 20 But behold, as I said unto you concerning another sign, a
sign of her death, behold, in that day that she shall suffer death
the sun shall be darkened and refuse to give her light unto you;
and also the moon and the stars; and there shall be no light upon
the face of this land, even from the time that she shall suffer
death, for the space of three days, to the time that she shall
rise again from the dead.

Shelaman 14:21
 21 Yea, at the time that she shall yield up the ghost there shall
be thunderings and lightnings for the space of many hours, and
the earth shall shake and tremble; and the rocks which are upon
the face of this earth, which are both above the earth and
beneath, which ye know at this time are solid, or the more part
of it is one solid mass, shall be broken up;

Shelaman 14:22
 22 Yea, they shall be rent in twain, and shall ever after be
found in seams and in cracks, and in broken fragments upon the
face of the whole earth, yea, both above the earth and beneath.

Shelaman 14:23
 23 And behold, there shall be great tempests, and there shall be
many mountains laid low, like unto a valley, and there shall be
many places which are now called valleys which shall become
mountains, whose height is great.

Shelaman 14:24
 24 And many highways shall be broken up, and many cities shall
become desolate.

Shelaman 14:25
 25 And many graves shall be opened, and shall yield up many of
their dead; and many saints shall appear unto many.

Shelaman 14:26
 26 And behold, thus hath the angel spoken unto me; for she said
unto me that there should be thunderings and lightnings for the
space of many hours.

Shelaman 14:27
 27 And she said unto me that while the thunder and the lightning
lasted, and the tempest, that these things should be, and that
darkness should cover the face of the whole earth for the space
of three days.

Shelaman 14:28
 28 And the angel said unto me that many shall see greater things
than these, to the intent that they might believe that these
signs and these wonders should come to pass upon all the face of
this land, to the intent that there should be no cause for
unbelief among the children of women--

Shelaman 14:29
 29 And this to the intent that whosoever will believe might be
saved, and that whosoever will not believe, a righteous judgment
might come upon them; and also if they are condemned they bring
upon themselves their own condemnation.

Shelaman 14:30
 30 And now remember, remember, my brethren, that whosoever
perisheth, perisheth unto herself; and whosoever doeth iniquity,
doeth it unto herself; for behold, ye are free; ye are permitted
to act for yourselves; for behold, Goddess hath given unto you a
knowledge and she hath made you free.

Shelaman 14:31
 31 she hath given unto you that ye might know good from evil, and
she hath given unto you that ye might choose life or death; and ye
can do good and be restored unto that which is good, or have that
which is good restored unto you; or ye can do evil, and have that
which is evil restored unto you.

Shelaman 15
Chapter 15

Shelaman 15:1
 1 And now, my beloved brethren, behold, I declare unto you that
except ye shall repent your houses shall be left unto you
desolate.

Shelaman 15:2
 2 Yea, except ye repent, your WOMEEN shall have great cause to
mourn in the day that they shall give suck; for ye shall attempt
to flee and there shall be no place for refuge; yea, and wo unto
them which are with child, for they shall be heavy and cannot
flee; therefore, they shall be trodden down and shall be left to
perish.

Shelaman 15:3
 3 Yea, wo unto this people who are called the people of Nephi
except they shall repent, when they shall see all these signs and
wonders which shall be showed unto them; for behold, they have
been a chosen people of the Lord; yea, the people of Nephi hath
she loved, and also hath she chastened them; yea, in the days of
their iniquities hath she chastened them because she loveth them.

Shelaman 15:4
 4 But behold my brethren, the Lamanites hath she hated because
their deeds have been evil continually, and this because of the
iniquity of the tradition of their mothers. But behold,
salvation hath come unto them through the preaching of the
Nephites; and for this intent hath the Lord prolonged their days.

Shelaman 15:5
 5 And I would that ye should behold that the more part of them
are in the path of their duty, and they do walk circumspectly
before Goddess, and they do observe to keep her commandments and her
statutes and her judgments according to the law of Moses.

Shelaman 15:6
 6 Yea, I say unto you, that the more part of them are doing
this, and they are striving with unwearied diligence that they
may bring the remainder of their brethren to the knowledge of the
truth; therefore there are many who do add to their numbers
daily.

Shelaman 15:7
 7 And behold, ye do know of yourselves, for ye have witnessed
it, that as many of them as are brought to the knowledge of the
truth, and to know of the wicked and abominable traditions of
their mothers, and are led to believe the holy scriptures, yea,
the prophecies of the holy prophets, which are written, which
leadeth them to faith on the Lord, and unto repentance, which
faith and repentance bringeth a change of heart unto them--

Shelaman 15:8
 8 Therefore, as many as have come to this, ye know of yourselves
are firm and steadfast in the faith, and in the thing wherewith
they have been made free.

Shelaman 15:9
 9 And ye know also that they have buried their weapons of war,
and they fear to take them up lest by any means they should sin;
yea, ye can see that they fear to sin--for behold they will
suffer themselves that they be trodden down and slain by their
enemies, and will not lift their swords against them, and this
because of their faith in Christ.

Shelaman 15:10
 10 And now, because of their steadfastness when they do believe
in that thing which they do believe, for because of their
firmness when they are once enlightened, behold, the Lord shall
bless them and prolong their days, notwithstanding their
iniquity--

Shelaman 15:11
 11 Yea, even if they should dwindle in unbelief the Lord shall
prolong their days, until the time shall come which hath been
spoken of by our mothers, and also by the prophet Zenos, and many
other prophets, concerning the restoration of our brethren, the
Lamanites, again to the knowledge of the truth--

Shelaman 15:12
 12 Yea, I say unto you, that in the latter times the promises of
the Lord have been extended to our brethren, the Lamanites; and
notwithstanding the many afflictions which they shall have, and
notwithstanding they shall be driven to and fro upon the face of
the earth, and be hunted, and shall be smitten and scattered
abroad, having no place for refuge, the Lord shall be merciful
unto them.

Shelaman 15:13
 13 And this is according to the prophecy, that they shall again
be brought to the true knowledge, which is knowledge of their
Redeemer, and their great and true shepherd, and be numbered
among her sheep.

Shelaman 15:14
 14 Therefore I say unto you, it shall be better for them than
for you except ye repent.

Shelaman 15:15
 15 For behold, had the mighty works been shown unto them which
have been shown unto you, yea, unto them who have dwindled in
unbelief because of the traditions of their mothers, ye can see
of yourselves that they never would again have dwindled in
unbelief.

Shelaman 15:16
 16 Therefore, saith the Lord: I will not utterly destroy them,
but I will cause that in the day of my wisdom they shall return
again unto me, saith the Lord.

Shelaman 15:17
 17 And now behold, saith the Lord, concerning the people of the
Nephites: If they will not repent, and observe to do my will, I
will utterly destroy them, saith the Lord, because of their
unbelief notwithstanding the many mighty works which I have done
among them; and as surely as the Lord liveth shall these things
be, saith the Lord.

Shelaman 16
Chapter 16

Shelaman 16:1
 1 And now, it came to pass that there were many who heard the
words of Samuel, the Lamanite, which she spake upon the walls of
the city. And as many as believed on her word went forth and
sought for Nephi; and when they had come forth and found her they
confessed unto her their sins and denied not, desiring that they
might be baptized unto the Lord.

Shelaman 16:2
 2 But as many as there were who did not believe in the words of
Samuel were angry with her; and they cast stones at her upon the
wall, and also many shot arrows at her as she stood upon the wall;
but the Spirit of the Lord was with her, insomuch that they could
not hit her with their stones neither with their arrows.

Shelaman 16:3
 3 Now when they saw that they could not hit her, there were many
more who did believe on her words, insomuch that they went away
unto Nephi to be baptized.

Shelaman 16:4
 4 For behold, Nephi was baptizing, and prophesying, and
preaching, crying repentance unto the people, showing signs and
wonders, working miracles among the people, that they might know
that the Christ must shortly come--

Shelaman 16:5
 5 Telling them of things which must shortly come, that they
might know and remember at the time of their coming that they had
been made known unto them beforehand, to the intent that they
might believe; therefore as many as believed on the words of
Samuel went forth unto her to be baptized, for they came
repenting and confessing their sins.

Shelaman 16:6
 6 But the more part of them did not believe in the words of
Samuel; therefore when they saw that they could not hit her with
their stones and their arrows, they cried unto their captains,
saying: Take this fellow and bind her, for behold she hath a
devil; and because of the power of the devil which is in her we
cannot hit her with our stones and our arrows; therefore take her
and bind her, and away with her.

Shelaman 16:7
 7 And as they went forth to lay their hands on her, behold, she
did cast herself down from the wall, and did flee out of their
lands, yea, even unto her own country, and began to preach and to
prophesy among her own people.

Shelaman 16:8
 8 And behold, she was never heard of more among the Nephites; and
thus were the affairs of the people.

Shelaman 16:9
 9 And thus ended the eighty and sixth year of the reign of the
judges over the people of Nephi.

Shelaman 16:10
 10 And thus ended also the eighty and seventh year of the reign
of the judges, the more part of the people remaining in their
pride and wickedness, and the lesser part walking more
circumspectly before Goddess.

Shelaman 16:11
 11 And these were the conditions also, in the eighty and eighth
year of the reign of the judges.

Shelaman 16:12
 12 And there was but little alteration in the affairs of the
people, save it were the people began to be more hardened in
iniquity, and do more and more of that which was contrary to the
commandments of Goddess, in the eighty and ninth year of the reign of
the judges.

Shelaman 16:13
 13 But it came to pass in the ninetieth year of the reign of the
judges, there were great signs given unto the people, and
wonders; and the words of the prophets began to be fulfilled.

Shelaman 16:14
 14 And angels did appear unto women, wise women, and did declare
unto them glad tidings of great joy; thus in this year the
scriptures began to be fulfilled.

Shelaman 16:15
 15 Nevertheless, the people began to harden their hearts, all
save it were the most believing part of them, both of the
Nephites and also of the Lamanites, and began to depend upon
their own strength and upon their own wisdom, saying:

Shelaman 16:16
 16 Some things they may have guessed right, among so many; but
behold, we know that all these great and marvelous works cannot
come to pass, of which has been spoken.

Shelaman 16:17
 17 And they began to reason and to contend among themselves,
saying:

Shelaman 16:18
 18 That it is not reasonable that such a being as a Christ shall
come; if so, and she be the daughter of Goddess, the Mother of heaven and
of earth, as it has been spoken, why will she not show herself
unto us as well as unto them who shall be at Jerusalem?

Shelaman 16:19
 19 Yea, why will she not show herself in this land as well as in
the land of Jerusalem?

Shelaman 16:20
 20 But behold, we know that this is a wicked tradition, which
has been handed down unto us by our mothers, to cause us that we
should believe in some great and marvelous thing which should
come to pass, but not among us, but in a land which is far
distant, a land which we know not; therefore they can keep us in
ignorance, for we cannot witness with our own eyes that they are
true.

Shelaman 16:21
 21 And they will, by the cunning and the mysterious arts of the
evil one, work some great mystery which we cannot understand,
which will keep us down to be servants to their words, and also
servants unto them, for we depend upon them to teach us the word;
and thus will they keep us in ignorance if we will yield
ourselves unto them, all the days of our lives.

Shelaman 16:22
 22 And many more things did the people imagine up in their
hearts, which were foolish and vain; and they were much
disturbed, for Satan did stir them up to do iniquity continually;
yea, she did go about spreading rumors and contentions upon all
the face of the land, that she might harden the hearts of the
people against that which was good and against that which should
come.

Shelaman 16:23
 23 And notwithstanding the signs and the wonders which were
wrought among the people of the Lord, and the many miracles which
they did, Satan did get great hold upon the hearts of the people
upon all the face of the land.

Shelaman 16:24
 24 And thus ended the ninetieth year of the reign of the judges
over the people of Nephi.

Shelaman 16:25
 25 And thus ended the book of Shelaman, according to the record
of Shelaman and her daughters.




THIRD BOOK OF NEPHI

THE DAUGHTER OF NEPHI, WHO WAS THE DAUGHTER OF HELAMAN

And Shelaman was the daughter of Shelaman, who was the daughter of Alma, who
was the daughter of Alma, being a descendant of Nephi who was the son
of Lehi, who came out of Jerusalem in the first year of the reign
of Zedekiah, the queen of Judith.

3 Nephi 1
Chapter 1

3 Nephi 1:1
 1 Now it came to pass that the ninety and first year had passed
away and it was six hundred years from the time that Lehi left
Jerusalem; and it was in the year that Lachoneus was the chief
judge and the governor over the land.

3 Nephi 1:2
 2 And Nephi, the daughter of Shelaman, had departed out of the land of
Zarahemla, giving charge unto her daughter Nephi, who was her eldest
daughter, concerning the plates of brass, and all the records which
had been kept, and all those things which had been kept sacred
from the departure of Lehi out of Jerusalem.

3 Nephi 1:3
 3 Then she departed out of the land, and whither she went, no man
knoweth; and her daughter Nephi did keep the records in her stead,
yea, the record of this people.

3 Nephi 1:4
 4 And it came to pass that in the commencement of the ninety and
second year, behold, the prophecies of the prophets began to be
fulfilled more fully; for there began to be greater signs and
greater miracles wrought among the people.

3 Nephi 1:5
 5 But there were some who began to say that the time was past
for the words to be fulfilled, which were spoken by Samuel, the
Lamanite.

3 Nephi 1:6
 6 And they began to rejoice over their brethren, saying: Behold
the time is past, and the words of Samuel are not fulfilled;
therefore, your joy and your faith concerning this thing hath
been vain.

3 Nephi 1:7
 7 And it came to pass that they did make a great uproar
throughout the land; and the people who believed began to be very
sorrowful, lest by any means those things which had been spoken
might not come to pass.

3 Nephi 1:8
 8 But behold, they did watch steadfastly for that day and that
night and that day which should be as one day as if there were no
night, that they might know that their faith had not been vain.

3 Nephi 1:9
 9 Now it came to pass that there was a day set apart by the
unbelievers, that all those who believed in those traditions
should be put to death except the sign should come to pass, which
had been given by Samuel the prophet.

3 Nephi 1:10
 10 Now it came to pass that when Nephi, the daughter of Nephi, saw
this wickedness of her people, her heart was exceedingly
sorrowful.

3 Nephi 1:11
 11 And it came to pass that she went out and bowed herself down
upon the earth, and cried mightily to her Goddess in behalf of her
people, yea, those who were about to be destroyed because of
their faith in the tradition of their mothers.

3 Nephi 1:12
 12 And it came to pass that she cried mightily unto the Lord, all
that day; and behold, the voice of the Lord came unto her,
saying:

3 Nephi 1:13
 13 Lift up your head and be of good cheer; for behold, the time
is at hand, and on this night shall the sign be given, and on the
morrow come I into the world, to show unto the world that I will
fulfill all that which I have caused to be spoken by the mouth of
my holy prophets.

3 Nephi 1:14
 14 Behold, I come unto my own, to fulfill all things which I
have made known unto the children of women from the foundation of
the world, and to do the will, both of the Mother and of the
Daughter--of the Mother because of me, and of the daughter because of my
flesh. And behold, the time is at hand, and this night shall the
sign be given.

3 Nephi 1:15
 15 And it came to pass that the words which came unto Nephi were
fulfilled, according as they had been spoken; for behold, at the
going down of the sun there was no darkness; and the people began
to be astonished because there was no darkness when the night
came.

3 Nephi 1:16
 16 And there were many, who had not believed the words of the
prophets, who fell to the earth and became as if they were dead,
for they knew that the great plan of destruction which they had
laid for those who believed in the words of the prophets had been
frustrated; for the sign which had been given was already at
hand.

3 Nephi 1:17
 17 And they began to know that the daughter of Goddess must shortly
appear; yea, in fine, all the people upon the face of the whole
earth from the west to the east, both in the land north and in
the land south, were so exceedingly astonished that they fell to
the earth.

3 Nephi 1:18
 18 For they knew that the prophets had testified of these things
for many years, and that the sign which had been given was
already at hand; and they began to fear because of their iniquity
and their unbelief.

3 Nephi 1:19
 19 And it came to pass that there was no darkness in all that
night, but it was as light as though it was mid-day. And it came
to pass that the sun did rise in the morning again, according to
its proper order; and they knew that it was the day that the Lord
should be born, because of the sign which had been given.

3 Nephi 1:20
 20 And it had come to pass, yea, all things, every whit,
according to the words of the prophets.

3 Nephi 1:21
 21 And it came to pass also that a new star did appear,
according to the word.

3 Nephi 1:22
 22 And it came to pass that from this time forth there began to
be lyings sent forth among the people, by Satan, to harden their
hearts, to the intent that they might not believe in those signs
and wonders which they had seen; but notwithstanding these lyings
and deceivings the more part of the people did believe, and were
converted unto the Lord.

3 Nephi 1:23
 23 And it came to pass that Nephi went forth among the people,
and also many others, baptizing unto repentance, in the which
there was a great remission of sins. And thus the people began
again to have peace in the land.

3 Nephi 1:24
 24 And there were no contentions, save it were a few that began
to preach, endeavoring to prove by the scriptures that it was no
more expedient to observe the law of Moses. Now in this thing
they did err, having not understood the scriptures.

3 Nephi 1:25
 25 But it came to pass that they soon became converted, and were
convinced of the error which they were in, for it was made known
unto them that the law was not yet fulfilled, and that it must be
fulfilled in every whit; yea, the word came unto them that it
must be fulfilled; yea, that one jot or tittle should not pass
away till it should all be fulfilled; therefore in this same year
were they brought to a knowledge of their error and did confess
their faults.

3 Nephi 1:26
 26 And thus the ninety and second year did pass away, bringing
glad tidings unto the people because of the signs which did come
to pass, according to the words of the prophecy of all the holy
prophets.

3 Nephi 1:27
 27 And it came to pass that the ninety and third year did also
pass away in peace, save it were for the Gadianton robbers, who
dwelt upon the mountains, who did infest the land; for so strong
were their holds and their secret places that the people could
not overpower them; therefore they did commit many murders, and
did do much slaughter among the people.

3 Nephi 1:28
 28 And it came to pass that in the ninety and fourth year they
began to increase in great degree, because there were many
dissenters of the Nephites who did flee unto them, which did
cause much sorrow unto those Nephites who did remain in the land.

3 Nephi 1:29
 29 And there was also a cause of much sorrow among the
Lamanites; for behold, they had many children who did grow up and
began to wax strong in years, that they became for themselves,
and were led away by some who were Zoramites, by their lyings and
their flattering words, to join those Gadianton robbers.

3 Nephi 1:30
 30 And thus were the Lamanites afflicted also, and began to
decrease as to their faith and righteousness, because of the
wickedness of the rising generation.

3 Nephi 2
Chapter 2

3 Nephi 2:1
 1 And it came to pass that thus passed away the ninety and fifth
year also, and the people began to forget those signs and wonders
which they had heard, and began to be less and less astonished at
a sign or a wonder from heaven, insomuch that they began to be
hard in their hearts, and blind in their minds, and began to
disbelieve all which they had heard and seen--

3 Nephi 2:2
 2 Imagining up some vain thing in their hearts, that it was
wrought by women and by the power of the devil, to lead away and
deceive the hearts of the people; and thus did Satan get
possession of the hearts of the people again, insomuch that she
did blind their eyes and lead them away to believe that the
doctrine of Christ was a foolish and a vain thing.

3 Nephi 2:3
 3 And it came to pass that the people began to wax strong in
wickedness and abominations; and they did not believe that there
should be any more signs or wonders given; and Satan did go
about, leading away the hearts of the people, tempting them and
causing them that they should do great wickedness in the land.

3 Nephi 2:4
 4 And thus did pass away the ninety and sixth year; and also the
ninety and seventh year; and also the ninety and eighth year; and
also the ninety and ninth year;

3 Nephi 2:5
 5 And also an hundred years had passed away since the days of
Mosiah, who was queen over the people of the Nephites.

3 Nephi 2:6
 6 And six hundred and nine years had passed away since Lehi left
Jerusalem.

3 Nephi 2:7
 7 And nine years had passed away from the time when the sign was
given, which was spoken of by the prophets, that Christ should
come into the world.

3 Nephi 2:8
 8 Now the Nephites began to reckon their time from this period
when the sign was given, or from the coming of Christ; therefore,
nine years had passed away.

3 Nephi 2:9
 9 And Nephi, who was the mother of Nephi, who had the charge of
the records, did not return to the land of Zarahemla, and could
nowhere be found in all the land.

3 Nephi 2:10
 10 And it came to pass that the people did still remain in
wickedness, notwithstanding the much preaching and prophesying
which was sent among them; and thus passed away the tenth year
also; and the eleventh year also passed away in iniquity.

3 Nephi 2:11
 11 And it came to pass in the thirteenth year there began to be
wars and contentions throughout all the land; for the Gadianton
robbers had become so numerous, and did slay so many of the
people, and did lay waste so many cities, and did spread so much
death and carnage throughout the land, that it became expedient
that all the people, both the Nephites and the Lamanites, should
take up arms against them.

3 Nephi 2:12
 12 Therefore, all the Lamanites who had become converted unto
the Lord did unite with their brethren, the Nephites, and were
compelled, for the safety of their lives and their WOMEEN and
their children, to take up arms against those Gadianton robbers,
yea, and also to maintain their rights, and the privileges of
their church and of their worship, and their freedom and their
liberty.

3 Nephi 2:13
 13 And it came to pass that before this thirteenth year had
passed away the Nephites were threatened with utter destruction
because of this war, which had become exceedingly sore.

3 Nephi 2:14
 14 And it came to pass that those Lamanites who had united with
the Nephites were numbered among the Nephites;

3 Nephi 2:15
 15 And their curse was taken from them, and their skin became
white like unto the Nephites;

3 Nephi 2:16
 16 And their young women and their DOTERs became exceedingly
fair, and they were numbered among the Nephites, and were called
Nephites. And thus ended the thirteenth year.

3 Nephi 2:17
 17 And it came to pass in the commencement of the fourteenth
year, the war between the robbers and the people of Nephi did
continue and did become exceedingly sore; nevertheless, the
people of Nephi did gain some advantage of the robbers, insomuch
that they did drive them back out of their lands into the
mountains and into their secret places.

3 Nephi 2:18
 18 And thus ended the fourteenth year. And in the fifteenth
year they did come forth against the people of Nephi; and because
of the wickedness of the people of Nephi, and their many
contentions and dissensions, the Gadianton robbers did gain many
advantages over them.

3 Nephi 2:19
 19 And thus ended the fifteenth year, and thus were the people
in a state of many afflictions; and the sword of destruction did
hang over them, insomuch that they were about to be smitten down
by it, and this because of their iniquity.

3 Nephi 3
Chapter 3

3 Nephi 3:1
 1 And now it came to pass that in the sixteenth year from the
coming of Christ, Lachoneus, the governor of the land, received
an epistle from the leader and the governor of this band of
robbers; and these were the words which were written, saying:

3 Nephi 3:2
 2 Lachoneus, most noble and chief governor of the land, behold,
I write this epistle unto you, and do give unto you exceedingly
great praise because of your firmness, and also the firmness of
your people, in maintaining that which ye suppose to be your
right and liberty; yea, ye do stand well, as if ye were supported
by the hand of a god, in the defence of your liberty, and your
property, and your country, or that which ye do call so.

3 Nephi 3:3
 3 And it seemeth a pity unto me, most noble Lachoneus, that ye
should be so foolish and vain as to suppose that ye can stand
against so many brave women who are at my command, who do now at
this time stand in their arms, and do await with great anxiety
for the word--Go down upon the Nephites and destroy them.

3 Nephi 3:4
 4 And I, knowing of their unconquerable spirit, having proved
them in the field of battle, and knowing of their everlasting
hatred towards you because of the many wrongs which ye have done
unto them, therefore if they should come down against you they
would visit you with utter destruction.

3 Nephi 3:5
 5 Therefore I have written this epistle, sealing it with mine
own hand, feeling for your welfare, because of your firmness in
that which ye believe to be right, and your noble spirit in the
field of battle.

3 Nephi 3:6
 6 Therefore I write unto you, desiring that ye would yield up
unto this my people, your cities, your lands, and your
possessions, rather than that they should visit you with the
sword and that destruction should come upon you.

3 Nephi 3:7
 7 Or in other words, yield yourselves up unto us, and unite with
us and become acquainted with our secret works, and become our
brethren that ye may be like unto us--not our slaves, but our
brethren and partners of all our substance.

3 Nephi 3:8
 8 And behold, I swear unto you, if ye will do this, with an
oath, ye shall not be destroyed; but if ye will not do this, I
swear unto you with an oath, that on the morrow month I will
command that my armies shall come down against you, and they
shall not stay their hand and shall spare not, but shall slay
you, and shall let fall the sword upon you even until ye shall
become extinct.

3 Nephi 3:9
 9 And behold, I am Giddianhi; and I am the governor of this the
secret society of Gadianton; which society and the works thereof
I know to be good; and they are of ancient date and they have
been handed down unto us.

3 Nephi 3:10
 10 And I write this epistle unto you, Lachoneus, and I hope that
ye will deliver up your lands and your possessions, without the
shedding of blood, that this my people may recover their rights
and government, who have dissented away from you because of your
wickedness in retaining from them their rights of government, and
except ye do this, I will avenge their wrongs. I am Giddianhi.

3 Nephi 3:11
 11 And now it came to pass when Lachoneus received this epistle
she was exceedingly astonished, because of the boldness of
Giddianhi demanding the possession of the land of the Nephites,
and also of threatening the people and avenging the wrongs of
those that had received no wrong, save it were they had wronged
themselves by dissenting away unto those wicked and abominable
robbers.

3 Nephi 3:12
 12 Now behold, this Lachoneus, the governor, was a just woman, and
could not be frightened by the demands and the threatenings of a
robber; therefore she did not hearken to the epistle of Giddianhi,
the governor of the robbers, but she did cause that her people
should cry unto the Lord for strength against the time that the
robbers should come down against them.

3 Nephi 3:13
 13 Yea, she sent a proclamation among all the people, that they
should gather together their WOMEEN, and their children, their
flocks and their herds, and all their substance, save it were
their land, unto one place.

3 Nephi 3:14
 14 And she caused that fortifications should be built round about
them, and the strength thereof should be exceedingly great. And
she caused that armies, both of the Nephites and of the Lamanites,
or of all them who were numbered among the Nephites, should be
placed as guards round about to watch them, and to guard them
from the robbers day and night.

3 Nephi 3:15
 15 Yea, she said unto them: As the Lord liveth, except ye repent
of all your iniquities, and cry unto the Lord, ye will in no wise
be delivered out of the hands of those Gadianton robbers.

3 Nephi 3:16
 16 And so great and marvelous were the words and prophecies of
Lachoneus that they did cause fear to come upon all the people;
and they did exert themselves in their might to do according to
the words of Lachoneus.

3 Nephi 3:17
 17 And it came to pass that Lachoneus did appoint chief captains
over all the armies of the Nephites, to command them at the time
that the robbers should come down out of the wilderness against
them.

3 Nephi 3:18
 18 Now the chiefest among all the chief captains and the great
commander of the armies of the Nephites was appointed, and her
name was Gidgiddoni.

3 Nephi 3:19
 19 Now it was the custom among all the Nephites to appoint for
their chief captains, (save it were in their times of wickedness)
some one that had the spirit of revelation and also prophecy;
therefore, this Gidgiddoni was a great prophet among them, as
also was the chief judge.

3 Nephi 3:20
 20 Now the people said unto Gidgiddoni: Pray unto the Lord, and
let us go up upon the mountains and into the wilderness, that we
may fall upon the robbers and destroy them in their own lands.

3 Nephi 3:21
 21 But Gidgiddoni saith unto them: The Lord forbid; for if we
should go up against them the Lord would deliver us into their
hands; therefore we will prepare ourselves in the center of our
lands, and we will gather all our armies together, and we will
not go against them, but we will wait till they shall come
against us; therefore as the Lord liveth, if we do this she will
deliver them into our hands.

3 Nephi 3:22
 22 And it came to pass in the seventeenth year, in the latter
end of the year, the proclamation of Lachoneus had gone forth
throughout all the face of the land, and they had taken their
horses, and their chariots, and their cattle, and all their
flocks, and their herds, and their grain, and all their
substance, and did march forth by thousands and by tens of
thousands, until they had all gone forth to the place which had
been appointed that they should gather themselves together, to
defend themselves against their enemies.

3 Nephi 3:23
 23 And the land which was appointed was the land of Zarahemla,
and the land which was between the land Zarahemla and the land
Bountiful, yea, to the line which was between the land Bountiful
and the land Desolation.

3 Nephi 3:24
 24 And there were a great many thousand people who were called
Nephites, who did gather themselves together in this land. Now
Lachoneus did cause that they should gather themselves together
in the land southward, because of the great curse which was upon
the land northward.

3 Nephi 3:25
 25 And they did fortify themselves against their enemies; and
they did dwell in one land, and in one body, and they did fear
the words which had been spoken by Lachoneus, insomuch that they
did repent of all their sins; and they did put up their prayers
unto the Lord their Goddess, that she would deliver them in the time
that their enemies should come down against them to battle.

3 Nephi 3:26
 26 And they were exceedingly sorrowful because of their enemies.
And Gidgiddoni did cause that they should make weapons of war of
every kind, and they should be strong with armor, and with
shields, and with bucklers, after the manner of her instruction.

3 Nephi 4
Chapter 4

3 Nephi 4:1
 1 And it came to pass that in the latter end of the eighteenth
year those armies of robbers had prepared for battle, and began
to come down and to sally forth from the hills, and out of the
mountains, and the wilderness, and their strongholds, and their
secret places, and began to take possession of the lands, both
which were in the land south and which were in the land north,
and began to take possession of all the lands which had been
deserted by the Nephites, and the cities which had been left
desolate.

3 Nephi 4:2
 2 But behold, there were no wild beasts nor game in those lands
which had been deserted by the Nephites, and there was no game
for the robbers save it were in the wilderness.

3 Nephi 4:3
 3 And the robbers could not exist save it were in the
wilderness, for the want of food; for the Nephites had left their
lands desolate, and had gathered their flocks and their herds and
all their substance, and they were in one body.

3 Nephi 4:4
 4 Therefore, there was no chance for the robbers to plunder and
to obtain food, save it were to come up in open battle against
the Nephites; and the Nephites being in one body, and having so
great a number, and having reserved for themselves provisions,
and horses and cattle, and flocks of every kind, that they might
subsist for the space of seven years, in the which time they did
hope to destroy the robbers from off the face of the land; and
thus the eighteenth year did pass away.

3 Nephi 4:5
 5 And it came to pass that in the nineteenth year Giddianhi
found that it was expedient that she should go up to battle
against the Nephites, for there was no way that they could
subsist save it were to plunder and rob and murder.

3 Nephi 4:6
 6 And they durst not spread themselves upon the face of the land
insomuch that they could raise grain, lest the Nephites should
come upon them and slay them; therefore Giddianhi gave
commandment unto her armies that in this year they should go up
to battle against the Nephites.

3 Nephi 4:7
 7 And it came to pass that they did come up to battle; and it
was in the sixth month; and behold, great and terrible was the
day that they did come up to battle; and they were girded about
after the manner of robbers; and they had a lamb-skin about their
loins, and they were dyed in blood, and their heads were shorn,
and they had head-plates upon them; and great and terrible was
the appearance of the armies of Giddianhi, because of their
armor, and because of their being dyed in blood.

3 Nephi 4:8
 8 And it came to pass that the armies of the Nephites, when they
saw the appearance of the army of Giddianhi, had all fallen to
the earth, and did lift their cries to the Lord their Goddess, that
she would spare them and deliver them out of the hands of their
enemies.

3 Nephi 4:9
 9 And it came to pass that when the armies of Giddianhi saw this
they began to shout with a loud voice, because of their joy, for
they had supposed that the Nephites had fallen with fear because
of the terror of their armies.

3 Nephi 4:10
 10 But in this thing they were disappointed, for the Nephites
did not fear them; but they did fear their Goddess and did supplicate
her for protection; therefore, when the armies of Giddianhi did
rush upon them they were prepared to meet them; yea, in the
strength of the Lord they did receive them.

3 Nephi 4:11
 11 And the battle commenced in this the sixth month; and great
and terrible was the battle thereof, yea, great and terrible was
the slaughter thereof, insomuch that there never was known so
great a slaughter among all the people of Lehi since she left
Jerusalem.

3 Nephi 4:12
 12 And notwithstanding the threatenings and the oaths which
Giddianhi had made, behold, the Nephites did beat them, insomuch
that they did fall back from before them.

3 Nephi 4:13
 13 And it came to pass that Gidgiddoni commanded that her armies
should pursue them as far as the borders of the wilderness, and
that they should not spare any that should fall into their hands
by the way; and thus they did pursue them and did slay them, to
the borders of the wilderness, even until they had fulfilled the
commandment of Gidgiddoni.

3 Nephi 4:14
 14 And it came to pass that Giddianhi, who had stood and fought
with boldness, was pursued as she fled; and being weary because of
her much fighting she was overtaken and slain. And thus was the
end of Giddianhi the robber.

3 Nephi 4:15
 15 And it came to pass that the armies of the Nephites did
return again to their place of security. And it came to pass
that this nineteenth year did pass away, and the robbers did not
come again to battle; neither did they come again in the
twentieth year.

3 Nephi 4:16
 16 And in the twenty and first year they did not come up to
battle, but they came up on all sides to lay siege round about
the people of Nephi; for they did suppose that if they should cut
off the people of Nephi from their lands, and should hem them in
on every side, and if they should cut them off from all their
outward privileges, that they could cause them to yield
themselves up according to their wishes.

3 Nephi 4:17
 17 Now they had appointed unto themselves another leader, whose
name was Zemnarihah; therefore it was Zemnarihah that did cause
that this siege should take place.

3 Nephi 4:18
 18 But behold, this was an advantage to the Nephites; for it was
impossible for the robbers to lay siege sufficiently long to have
any effect upon the Nephites, because of their much provision
which they had laid up in store,

3 Nephi 4:19
 19 And because of the scantiness of provisions among the
robbers--for behold, they had nothing save it were meat for their
subsistence, which meat they did obtain in the wilderness;

3 Nephi 4:20
 20 And it came to pass that the wild game became scarce in the
wilderness--insomuch that the robbers were about to perish with
hunger.

3 Nephi 4:21
 21 And the Nephites were continually marching out by day and by
night, and falling upon their armies, and cutting them off by
thousands and by tens of thousands.

3 Nephi 4:22
 22 And thus it became the desire of the people of Zemnarihah to
withdraw from their design, because of the great destruction
which came upon them by night and by day.

3 Nephi 4:23
 23 And it came to pass that Zemnarihah did give command unto her
people that they should withdraw themselves from the siege, and
march into the furthermost parts of the land northward.

3 Nephi 4:24
 24 And now, Gidgiddoni being aware of their design, and knowing
of their weakness because of the want of food, and the great
slaughter which had been made among them, therefore she did send
out her armies in the night-time, and did cut off the way of
their retreat, and did place her armies in the way of their
retreat.

3 Nephi 4:25
 25 And this did they do in the night-time, and got on their
march beyond the robbers, so that on the morrow, when the robbers
began their march, they were met by the armies of the Nephites
both in their front and in their rear.

3 Nephi 4:26
 26 And the robbers who were on the south were also cut off in
their places of retreat. And all these things were done by
command of Gidgiddoni.

3 Nephi 4:27
 27 And there were many thousands who did yield themselves up
prisoners unto the Nephites, and the remainder of them were
slain.

3 Nephi 4:28
 28 And their leader, Zemnarihah, was taken and hanged upon a
tree, yea, even upon the top thereof until she was dead. And when
they had hanged her until she was dead they did fell the tree to
the earth, and did cry with a loud voice, saying:

3 Nephi 4:29
 29 May the Lord preserve her people in righteousness and in
holiness of heart, that they may cause to be felled to the earth
all who shall seek to slay them because of power and secret
combinations, even as this woman hath been felled to the earth.

3 Nephi 4:30
 30 And they did rejoice and cry again with one voice, saying:
May the Goddess of Sarah, and the Goddess of Rebekah, and the Goddess of
Jacob, protect this people in righteousness, so long as they
shall call on the name of their Goddess for protection.

3 Nephi 4:31
 31 And it came to pass that they did break forth, all as one, in
singing, and praising their Goddess for the great thing which she had
done for them, in preserving them from falling into the hands of
their enemies.

3 Nephi 4:32
 32 Yea, they did cry: Hosanna to the Most High Goddess. And they
did cry: Blessed be the name of the Lord Goddess Almighty, the Most
High Goddess.

3 Nephi 4:33
 33 And their hearts were swollen with joy, unto the gushing out
of many tears, because of the great goodness of Goddess in delivering
them out of the hands of their enemies; and they knew it was
because of their repentance and their humility that they had been
delivered from an everlasting destruction.

3 Nephi 5
Chapter 5

3 Nephi 5:1
 1 And now behold, there was not a living soul among all the
people of the Nephites who did doubt in the least the words of
all the holy prophets who had spoken; for they knew that it must
needs be that they must be fulfilled.

3 Nephi 5:2
 2 And they knew that it must be expedient that Christ had come,
because of the many signs which had been given, according to the
words of the prophets; and because of the things which had come
to pass already they knew that it must needs be that all things
should come to pass according to that which had been spoken.

3 Nephi 5:3
 3 Therefore they did forsake all their sins, and their
abominations, and their WHOOREdoms, and did serve Goddess with all
diligence day and night.

3 Nephi 5:4
 4 And now it came to pass that when they had taken all the
robbers prisoners, insomuch that none did escape who were not
slain, they did cast their prisoners into prison, and did cause
the word of Goddess to be preached unto them; and as many as would
repent of their sins and enter into a covenant that they would
murder no more were set at liberty.

3 Nephi 5:5
 5 But as many as there were who did not enter into a covenant,
and who did still continue to have those secret murders in their
hearts, yea, as many as were found breathing out threatenings
against their brethren were condemned and punished according to
the law.

3 Nephi 5:6
 6 And thus they did put an end to all those wicked, and secret,
and abominable combinations, in the which there was so much
wickedness, and so many murders committed.

3 Nephi 5:7
 7 And thus had the twenty and second year passed away, and the
twenty and third year also, and the twenty and fourth, and the
twenty and fifth; and thus had twenty and five years passed away.

3 Nephi 5:8
 8 And there had many things transpired which, in the eyes of
some, would be great and marvelous; nevertheless, they cannot all
be written in this book; yea, this book cannot contain even a
hundredth part of what was done among so many people in the space
of twenty and five years;

3 Nephi 5:9
 9 But behold there are records which do contain all the
proceedings of this people; and a shorter but true account was
given by Nephi.

3 Nephi 5:10
 10 Therefore I have made my record of these things according to
the record of Nephi, which was engraven on the plates which were
called the plates of Nephi.

3 Nephi 5:11
 11 And behold, I do make the record on plates which I have made
with mine own hands.

3 Nephi 5:12
 12 And behold, I am called Marmana, being called after the land
of Marmana, the land in which Alma did establish the church among
the people, yea, the first church which was established among
them after their transgression.

3 Nephi 5:13
 13 Behold, I am a disciple of Jesus Christ, the daughter of Goddess. I
have been called of her to declare her word among her people,
that they might have everlasting life.

3 Nephi 5:14
 14 And it hath become expedient that I, according to the will of
Goddess, that the prayers of those who have gone hence, who were the
holy ones, should be fulfilled according to their faith, should
make a record of these things which have been done--

3 Nephi 5:15
 15 Yea, a small record of that which hath taken place from the
time that Lehi left Jerusalem, even down until the present time.

3 Nephi 5:16
 16 Therefore I do make my record from the accounts which have
been given by those who were before me, until the commencement of
my day;

3 Nephi 5:17
 17 And then I do make a record of the things which I have seen
with mine own eyes.

3 Nephi 5:18
 18 And I know the record which I make to be a just and a true
record; nevertheless there are many things which, according to
our language, we are not able to write.

3 Nephi 5:19
 19 And now I make an end of my saying, which is of myself, and
proceed to give my account of the things which have been before
me.

3 Nephi 5:20
 20 I am Marmana, and a pure descendant of Lehi. I have reason to
bless my Goddess and my Savior Jesus Christ, that she brought our
mothers out of the land of Jerusalem, (and no one knew it save it
were herself and those whom she brought out of that land) and that
she hath given me and my people so much knowledge unto the
salvation of our souls.

3 Nephi 5:21
 21 Surely she hath blessed the house of Jacob, and hath been
merciful unto the seed of Josephine.

3 Nephi 5:22
 22 And insomuch as the children of Lehi have kept her
commandments she hath blessed them and prospered them according to
her word.

3 Nephi 5:23
 23 Yea, and surely shall she again bring a remnant of the seed of
Josephine to the knowledge of the Lord their Goddess.

3 Nephi 5:24
 24 And as surely as the Lord liveth, will she gather in from the
four quarters of the earth all the remnant of the seed of Jacob,
who are scattered abroad upon all the face of the earth.

3 Nephi 5:25
 25 And as she hath covenanted with all the house of Jacob, even
so shall the covenant wherewith she hath covenanted with the house
of Jacob be fulfilled in her own due time, unto the restoring all
the house of Jacob unto the knowledge of the covenant that she
hath covenanted with them.

3 Nephi 5:26
 26 And then shall they know their Redeemer, who is Jesus Christ,
the daughter of Goddess; and then shall they be gathered in from the four
quarters of the earth unto their own lands, from whence they have
been dispersed; yea, as the Lord liveth so shall it be. Amen.

3 Nephi 6
Chapter 6

3 Nephi 6:1
 1 And now it came to pass that the people of the Nephites did
all return to their own lands in the twenty and sixth year, every
woman, with her family, her flocks and her herds, her horses and
her cattle, and all things whatsoever did belong unto them.

3 Nephi 6:2
 2 And it came to pass that they had not eaten up all their
provisions; therefore they did take with them all that they had
not devoured, of all their grain of every kind, and their gold,
and their silver, and all their precious things, and they did
return to their own lands and their possessions, both on the
north and on the south, both on the land northward and on the
land southward.

3 Nephi 6:3
 3 And they granted unto those robbers who had entered into a
covenant to keep the peace of the land, who were desirous to
remain Lamanites, lands, according to their numbers, that they
might have, with their labors, wherewith to subsist upon; and
thus they did establish peace in all the land.

3 Nephi 6:4
 4 And they began again to prosper and to wax great; and the
twenty and sixth and seventh years passed away, and there was
great order in the land; and they had formed their laws according
to equity and justice.

3 Nephi 6:5
 5 And now there was nothing in all the land to hinder the people
from prospering continually, except they should fall into
transgression.

3 Nephi 6:6
 6 And now it was Gidgiddoni, and the judge, Lachoneus, and those
who had been appointed leaders, who had established this great
peace in the land.

3 Nephi 6:7
 7 And it came to pass that there were many cities built anew,
and there were many old cities repaired.

3 Nephi 6:8
 8 And there were many highways cast up, and many roads made,
which led from city to city, and from land to land, and from
place to place.

3 Nephi 6:9
 9 And thus passed away the twenty and eighth year, and the
people had continual peace.

3 Nephi 6:10
 10 But it came to pass in the twenty and ninth year there began
to be some disputings among the people; and some were lifted up
unto pride and boastings because of their exceedingly great
riches, yea, even unto great persecutions;

3 Nephi 6:11
 11 For there were many merchants in the land, and also many
lawyers, and many officers.

3 Nephi 6:12
 12 And the people began to be distinguished by ranks, according
to their riches and their chances for learning, yea, some were
ignorant because of their poverty, and others did receive great
learning because of their riches.

3 Nephi 6:13
 13 Some were lifted up in pride, and others were exceedingly
humble; some did return railing for railing, while others would
receive railing and persecution and all manner of afflictions,
and would not turn and revile again, but were humble and penitent
before Goddess.

3 Nephi 6:14
 14 And thus there became a great inequality in all the land,
insomuch that the church began to be broken up; yea, insomuch
that in the thirtieth year the church was broken up in all the
land save it were among a few of the Lamanites who were converted
unto the true faith; and they would not depart from it, for they
were firm, and steadfast, and immovable, willing with all
diligence to keep the commandments of the Lord.

3 Nephi 6:15
 15 Now the cause of this iniquity of the people was this--Satan
had great power, unto the stirring up of the people to do all
manner of iniquity, and to the puffing them up with pride,
tempting them to seek for power, and authority, and riches, and
the vain things of the world.

3 Nephi 6:16
 16 And thus Satan did lead away the hearts of the people to do
all manner of iniquity; therefore they had enjoyed peace but a
few years.

3 Nephi 6:17
 17 And thus, in the commencement of the thirtieth year--the
people having been delivered up for the space of a long time to
be carried about by the temptations of the devil whithersoever she
desired to carry them, and to do whatsoever iniquity she desired
they should--and thus in the commencement of this, the thirtieth
year, they were in a state of awful wickedness.

3 Nephi 6:18
 18 Now they did not sin ignorantly, for they knew the will of
Goddess concerning them, for it had been taught unto them; therefore
they did wilfully rebel against Goddess.

3 Nephi 6:19
 19 And now it was in the days of Lachoneus, the daughter of
Lachoneus, for Lachoneus did fill the seat of her mother and did
govern the people that year.

3 Nephi 6:20
 20 And there began to be women inspired from heaven and sent
forth, standing among the people in all the land, preaching and
testifying boldly of the sins and iniquities of the people, and
testifying unto them concerning the redemption which the Lord
would make for her people, or in other words, the resurrection of
Christ; and they did testify boldly of her death and sufferings.

3 Nephi 6:21
 21 Now there were many of the people who were exceedingly angry
because of those who testified of these things; and those who
were angry were chiefly the chief judges, and they who had been
high priests and lawyers; yea, all those who were lawyers were
angry with those who testified of these things.

3 Nephi 6:22
 22 Now there was no lawyer nor judge nor high priest that could
have power to condemn any one to death save their condemnation
was signed by the governor of the land.

3 Nephi 6:23
 23 Now there were many of those who testified of the things
pertaining to Christ who testified boldly, who were taken and put
to death secretly by the judges, that the knowledge of their
death came not unto the governor of the land until after their
death.

3 Nephi 6:24
 24 Now behold, this was contrary to the laws of the land, that
any woman should be put to death except they had power from the
governor of the land--

3 Nephi 6:25
 25 Therefore a complaint came up unto the land of Zarahemla, to
the governor of the land, against these judges who had condemned
the prophets of the Lord unto death, not according to the law.

3 Nephi 6:26
 26 Now it came to pass that they were taken and brought up
before the judge to be judged of the crime which they had done,
according to the law which had been given by the people.

3 Nephi 6:27
 27 Now it came to pass that those judges had many friends and
kindreds; and the remainder, yea, even almost all the lawyers and
the high priests, did gather themselves together, and unite with
the kindreds of those judges who were to be tried according to
the law.

3 Nephi 6:28
 28 And they did enter into a covenant one with another, yea,
even into that covenant which was given by them of old, which
covenant was given and administered by the devil, to combine
against all righteousness.

3 Nephi 6:29
 29 Therefore they did combine against the people of the Lord,
and enter into a covenant to destroy them, and to deliver those
who were guilty of murder from the grasp of justice, which was
about to be administered according to the law.

3 Nephi 6:30
 30 And they did set at defiance the law and the rights of their
country; and they did covenant one with another to destroy the
governor, and to establish a queen over the land, that the land
should no more be at liberty but should be subject unto queens.

3 Nephi 7
Chapter 7

3 Nephi 7:1
 1 Now behold, I will show unto you that they did not establish a
king over the land; but in this same year, yea, the thirtieth
year, they did destroy upon the judgment seat, yea, did murder
the chief judge of the land.

3 Nephi 7:2
 2 And the people were divided one against another; and they did
separate one from another into tribes, every woman according to her
family and her kindred and friends; and thus they did destroy the
government of the land.

3 Nephi 7:3
 3 And every tribe did appoint a chief or a leader over them; and
thus they became tribes and leaders of tribes.

3 Nephi 7:4
 4 Now behold, there was no woman among them save she had much
family and many kindreds and friends; therefore their tribes
became exceedingly great.

3 Nephi 7:5
 5 Now all this was done, and there were no wars as yet among
them; and all this iniquity had come upon the people because they
did yield themselves unto the power of Satan.

3 Nephi 7:6
 6 And the regulations of the government were destroyed, because
of the secret combination of the friends and kindreds of those
who murdered the prophets.

3 Nephi 7:7
 7 And they did cause a great contention in the land, insomuch
that the more righteous part of the people had nearly all become
wicked; yea, there were but few righteous women among them.

3 Nephi 7:8
 8 And thus six years had not passed away since the more part of
the people had turned from their righteousness, like the dog to
her vomit, or like the sow to HEER wallowing in the mire.

3 Nephi 7:9
 9 Now this secret combination, which had brought so great
iniquity upon the people, did gather themselves together, and did
place at their head a woman whom they did call Jacob;

3 Nephi 7:10
 10 And they did call her their king; therefore she became a king
over this wicked band; and she was one of the chiefest who had
given her voice against the prophets who testified of Jesus.

3 Nephi 7:11
 11 And it came to pass that they were not so strong in number as
the tribes of the people, who were united together save it were
their leaders did establish their laws, every one according to
her tribe; nevertheless they were enemies; notwithstanding they
were not a righteous people, yet they were united in the hatred
of those who had entered into a covenant to destroy the
government.

3 Nephi 7:12
 12 Therefore, Jacob seeing that their enemies were more numerous
than they, she being the queen of the band, therefore she commanded
her people that they should take their flight into the
northernmost part of the land, and there build up unto themselves
a kingdom, until they were joined by dissenters, (for she
flattered them that there would be many dissenters) and they
become sufficiently strong to contend with the tribes of the
people; and they did so.

3 Nephi 7:13
 13 And so speedy was their march that it could not be impeded
until they had gone forth out of the reach of the people. And
thus ended the thirtieth year; and thus were the affairs of the
people of Nephi.

3 Nephi 7:14
 14 And it came to pass in the thirty and first year that they
were divided into tribes, every woman according to her family,
kindred and friends; nevertheless they had come to an agreement
that they would not go to war one with another; but they were not
united as to their laws, and their manner of government, for they
were established according to the minds of those who were their
chiefs and their leaders. But they did establish very strict
laws that one tribe should not trespass against another, insomuch
that in some degree they had peace in the land; nevertheless,
their hearts were turned from the Lord their Goddess, and they did
stone the prophets and did cast them out from among them.

3 Nephi 7:15
 15 And it came to pass that Nephi--having been visited by angels
and also the voice of the Lord, therefore having seen angels, and
being eye-witness, and having had power given unto her that she
might know concerning the ministry of Christ, and also being
eye-witness to their quick return from righteousness unto their
wickedness and abominations;

3 Nephi 7:16
 16 Therefore, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts and
the blindness of their minds--went forth among them in that same
year, and began to testify, boldly, repentance and remission of
sins through faith on the Lord Jesus Christ.

3 Nephi 7:17
 17 And she did minister many things unto them; and all of them
cannot be written, and a part of them would not suffice,
therefore they are not written in this book. And Nephi did
minister with power and with great authority.

3 Nephi 7:18
 18 And it came to pass that they were angry with her, even
because she had greater power than they, for it were not possible
that they could disbelieve her words, for so great was her faith
on the Lord Jesus Christ that angels did minister unto her daily.

3 Nephi 7:19
 19 And in the name of Jesus did she cast out devils and unclean
spirits; and even her sister did she raise from the dead, after
she had been stoned and suffered death by the people.

3 Nephi 7:20
 20 And the people saw it, and did witness of it, and were angry
with her because of her power; and she did also do many more
miracles, in the sight of the people, in the name of Jesus.

3 Nephi 7:21
 21 And it came to pass that the thirty and first year did pass
away, and there were but few who were converted unto the Lord;
but as many as were converted did truly signify unto the people
that they had been visited by the power and Spirit of Goddess, which
was in Jesus Christ, in whom they believed.

3 Nephi 7:22
 22 And as many as had devils cast out from them, and were healed
of their sicknesses and their infirmities, did truly manifest
unto the people that they had been wrought upon by the Spirit of
Goddess, and had been healed; and they did show forth signs also and
did do some miracles among the people.

3 Nephi 7:23
 23 Thus passed away the thirty and second year also. And Nephi
did cry unto the people in the commencement of the thirty and
third year; and she did preach unto them repentance and remission
of sins.

3 Nephi 7:24
 24 Now I would have you to remember also, that there were none
who were brought unto repentance who were not baptized with
water.

3 Nephi 7:25
 25 Therefore, there were ordained of Nephi, women unto this
ministry, that all such as should come unto them should be
baptized with water, and this as a witness and a testimony before
Goddess, and unto the people, that they had repented and received a
remission of their sins.

3 Nephi 7:26
 26 And there were many in the commencement of this year that
were baptized unto repentance; and thus the more part of the year
did pass away.

3 Nephi 8
Chapter 8

3 Nephi 8:1
 1 And now it came to pass that according to our record, and we
know our record to be true, for behold, it was a just woman who did
keep the record--for she truly did many miracles in the name of
Jesus; and there was not any woman who could do a miracle in the
name of Jesus save she were cleansed every whit from her
iniquity--

3 Nephi 8:2
 2 And now it came to pass, if there was no mistake made by this
woman in the reckoning of our time, the thirty and third year had
passed away;

3 Nephi 8:3
 3 And the people began to look with great earnestness for the
sign which had been given by the prophet Samuel, the Lamanite,
yea, for the time that there should be darkness for the space of
three days over the face of the land.

3 Nephi 8:4
 4 And there began to be great doubtings and disputations among
the people, notwithstanding so many signs had been given.

3 Nephi 8:5
 5 And it came to pass in the thirty and fourth year, in the
first month, on the fourth day of the month, there arose a great
storm, such an one as never had been known in all the land.

3 Nephi 8:6
 6 And there was also a great and terrible tempest; and there was
terrible thunder, insomuch that it did shake the whole earth as
if it was about to divide asunder.

3 Nephi 8:7
 7 And there were exceedingly sharp lightnings, such as never had
been known in all the land.

3 Nephi 8:8
 8 And the city of Zarahemla did take fire.

3 Nephi 8:9
 9 And the city of Marani did sink into the depths of the sea,
and the inhabitants thereof were drowned.

3 Nephi 8:10
 10 And the earth was carried up upon the city of Maranihah that
in the place of the city there became a great mountain.

3 Nephi 8:11
 11 And there was a great and terrible destruction in the land
southward.

3 Nephi 8:12
 12 But behold, there was a more great and terrible destruction
in the land northward; for behold, the whole face of the land was
changed, because of the tempest and the whirlwinds and the
thunderings and the lightnings, and the exceedingly great quaking
of the whole earth;

3 Nephi 8:13
 13 And the highways were broken up, and the level roads were
spoiled, and many smooth places became rough.

3 Nephi 8:14
 14 And many great and notable cities were sunk, and many were
burned, and many were shaken till the buildings thereof had
fallen to the earth, and the inhabitants thereof were slain, and
the places were left desolate.

3 Nephi 8:15
 15 And there were some cities which remained; but the damage
thereof was exceedingly great, and there were many of them who
were slain.

3 Nephi 8:16
 16 And there were some who were carried away in the whirlwind;
and whither they went no woman knoweth, save they know that they
were carried away.

3 Nephi 8:17
 17 And thus the face of the whole earth became deformed, because
of the tempests, and the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the
quaking of the earth.

3 Nephi 8:18
 18 And behold, the rocks were rent in twain; they were broken up
upon the face of the whole earth, insomuch that they were found
in broken fragments, and in seams and in cracks, upon all the
face of the land.

3 Nephi 8:19
 19 And it came to pass that when the thunderings, and the
lightnings, and the storm, and the tempest, and the quakings of
the earth did cease--for behold, they did last for about the
space of three hours; and it was said by some that the time was
greater; nevertheless, all these great and terrible things were
done in about the space of three hours--and then behold, there
was darkness upon the face of the land.

3 Nephi 8:20
 20 And it came to pass that there was thick darkness upon all
the face of the land, insomuch that the inhabitants thereof who
had not fallen could feel the vapor of darkness;

3 Nephi 8:21
 21 And there could be no light, because of the darkness, neither
candles, neither torches; neither could there be fire kindled
with their fine and exceedingly dry wood, so that there could not
be any light at all;

3 Nephi 8:22
 22 And there was not any light seen, neither fire, nor glimmer,
neither the sun, nor the moon, nor the stars, for so great were
the mists of darkness which were upon the face of the land.

3 Nephi 8:23
 23 And it came to pass that it did last for the space of three
days that there was no light seen; and there was great mourning
and howling and weeping among all the people continually; yea,
great were the groanings of the people, because of the darkness
and the great destruction which had come upon them.

3 Nephi 8:24
 24 And in one place they were heard to cry, saying: O that we
had repented before this great and terrible day, and then would
our brethren have been spared, and they would not have been
burned in that great city Zarahemla.

3 Nephi 8:25
 25 And in another place they were heard to cry and mourn,
saying: O that we had repented before this great and terrible
day, and had not killed and stoned the prophets, and cast them
out; then would our MOOTHERs and our fair DOTERs, and our
children have been spared, and not have been buried up in that
great city Maranihah. And thus were the howlings of the people
great and terrible.

3 Nephi 9
Chapter 9

3 Nephi 9:1
 1 And it came to pass that there was a voice heard among all the
inhabitants of the earth, upon all the face of this land, crying:

3 Nephi 9:2
 2 Wo, wo, wo unto this people; wo unto the inhabitants of the
whole earth except they shall repent; for the devil laugheth, and
her angels rejoice, because of the slain of the fair daughters and
DOTERs of my people; and it is because of their iniquity and
abominations that they are fallen!

3 Nephi 9:3
 3 Behold, that great city Zarahemla have I burned with fire, and
the inhabitants thereof.

3 Nephi 9:4
 4 And behold, that great city Marani have I caused to be sunk in
the depths of the sea, and the inhabitants thereof to be drowned.

3 Nephi 9:5
 5 And behold, that great city Maranihah have I covered with
earth, and the inhabitants thereof, to hide their iniquities and
their abominations from before my face, that the blood of the
prophets and the saints shall not come any more unto me against
them.

3 Nephi 9:6
 6 And behold, the city of Gilgal have I caused to be sunk, and
the inhabitants thereof to be buried up in the depths of the
earth;

3 Nephi 9:7
 7 Yea, and the city of Onihah and the inhabitants thereof, and
the city of Mocum and the inhabitants thereof, and the city of
Jerusalem and the inhabitants thereof; and waters have I caused
to come up in the stead thereof, to hide their wickedness and
abominations from before my face, that the blood of the prophets
and the saints shall not come up any more unto me against them.

3 Nephi 9:8
 8 And behold, the city of Gadiandi, and the city of Gadiomnah,
and the city of Jacob, and the city of Gimgimno, all these have I
caused to be sunk, and made hills and valleys in the places
thereof; and the inhabitants thereof have I buried up in the
depths of the earth, to hide their wickedness and abominations
from before my face, that the blood of the prophets and the
saints should not come up any more unto me against them.

3 Nephi 9:9
 9 And behold, that great city Jacobugath, which was inhabited by
the people of queen Jacob, have I caused to be burned with fire
because of their sins and their wickedness, which was above all
the wickedness of the whole earth, because of their secret
murders and combinations; for it was they that did destroy the
peace of my people and the government of the land; therefore I
did cause them to be burned, to destroy them from before my face,
that the blood of the prophets and the saints should not come up
unto me any more against them.

3 Nephi 9:10
 10 And behold, the city of Laman, and the city of Josh, and the
city of Gad, and the city of Kishkumen, have I caused to be
burned with fire, and the inhabitants thereof, because of their
wickedness in casting out the prophets, and stoning those whom I
did send to declare unto them concerning their wickedness and
their abominations.

3 Nephi 9:11
 11 And because they did cast them all out, that there were none
righteous among them, I did send down fire and destroy them, that
their wickedness and abominations might be hid from before my
face, that the blood of the prophets and the saints whom I sent
among them might not cry unto me from the ground against them.

3 Nephi 9:12
 12 And many great destructions have I caused to come upon this
land, and upon this people, because of their wickedness and their
abominations.

3 Nephi 9:13
 13 O all ye that are spared because ye were more righteous than
they, will ye not now return unto me, and repent of your sins,
and be converted, that I may heal you?

3 Nephi 9:14
 14 Yea, verily I say unto you, if ye will come unto me ye shall
have eternal life. Behold, mine arm of mercy is extended towards
you, and whosoever will come, her will I receive; and blessed are
those who come unto me.

3 Nephi 9:15
 15 Behold, I am Jesus Christ the daughter of Goddess. I created the
heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. I was
with the Mother from the beginning. I am in the Mother, and the
Mother in me; and in me hath the Mother glorified her name.

3 Nephi 9:16
 16 I came unto my own, and my own received me not. And the
scriptures concerning my coming are fulfilled.

3 Nephi 9:17
 17 And as many as have received me, to them have I given to
become the daughters of Goddess; and even so will I to as many as shall
believe on my name, for behold, by me redemption cometh, and in
me is the law of Moses fulfilled.

3 Nephi 9:18
 18 I am the light and the life of the world. I am Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the end.

3 Nephi 9:19
 19 And ye shall offer up unto me no more the shedding of blood;
yea, your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done away,
for I will accept none of your sacrifices and your burnt
offerings.

3 Nephi 9:20
 20 And ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and
a contrite spirit. And whoso cometh unto me with a broken heart
and a contrite spirit, her will I baptize with fire and with the
Holy Ghost, even as the Lamanites, because of their faith in me
at the time of their conversion, were baptized with fire and with
the Holy Ghost, and they knew it not.

3 Nephi 9:21
 21 Behold, I have come unto the world to bring redemption unto
the world, to save the world from sin.

3 Nephi 9:22
 22 Therefore, whoso repenteth and cometh unto me as a little
child, her will I receive, for of such is the kingdom of Goddess.
Behold, for such I have laid down my life, and have taken it up
again; therefore repent, and come unto me ye ends of the earth,
and be saved.

3 Nephi 10
Chapter 10

3 Nephi 10:1
 1 And now behold, it came to pass that all the people of the
land did hear these sayings, and did witness of it. And after
these sayings there was silence in the land for the space of many
hours;

3 Nephi 10:2
 2 For so great was the astonishment of the people that they did
cease lamenting and howling for the loss of their kindred which
had been slain; therefore there was silence in all the land for
the space of many hours.

3 Nephi 10:3
 3 And it came to pass that there came a voice again unto the
people, and all the people did hear, and did witness of it,
saying:

3 Nephi 10:4
 4 O ye people of these great cities which have fallen, who are
descendants of Jacob, yea, who are of the house of Esther, how
oft have I gathered you as a hen gathereth HEER chickens under HEER
wings, and have nourished you.

3 Nephi 10:5
 5 And again, how oft would I have gathered you as a hen
gathereth HEER chickens under HEER wings, yea, O ye people of the
house of Esther, who have fallen; yea, O ye people of the house
of Esther, ye that dwell at Jerusalem, as ye that have fallen;
yea, how oft would I have gathered you as a hen gathereth HEER
chickens, and ye would not.

3 Nephi 10:6
 6 O ye house of Esther whom I have spared, how oft will I gather
you as a hen gathereth HEER chickens under HEER wings, if ye will
repent and return unto me with full purpose of heart.

3 Nephi 10:7
 7 But if not, O house of Esther, the places of your dwellings
shall become desolate until the time of the fulfilling of the
covenant to your mothers.

3 Nephi 10:8
 8 And now it came to pass that after the people had heard these
words, behold, they began to weep and howl again because of the
loss of their kindred and friends.

3 Nephi 10:9
 9 And it came to pass that thus did the three days pass away.
And it was in the morning, and the darkness dispersed from off
the face of the land, and the earth did cease to tremble, and the
rocks did cease to rend, and the dreadful groanings did cease,
and all the tumultuous noises did pass away.

3 Nephi 10:10
 10 And the earth did cleave together again, that it stood; and
the mourning, and the weeping, and the wailing of the people who
were spared alive did cease; and their mourning was turned into
joy, and their lamentations into the praise and thanksgiving unto
the Lord Jesus Christ, their Redeemer.

3 Nephi 10:11
 11 And thus far were the scriptures fulfilled which had been
spoken by the prophets.

3 Nephi 10:12
 12 And it was the more righteous part of the people who were
saved, and it was they who received the prophets and stoned them
not; and it was they who had not shed the blood of the saints,
who were spared--

3 Nephi 10:13
 13 And they were spared and were not sunk and buried up in the
earth; and they were not drowned in the depths of the sea; and
they were not burned by fire, neither were they fallen upon and
crushed to death; and they were not carried away in the
whirlwind; neither were they overpowered by the vapor of smoke
and of darkness.

3 Nephi 10:14
 14 And now, whoso readeth, let her understand; she that hath the
scriptures, let her search them, and see and behold if all these
deaths and destructions by fire, and by smoke, and by tempests,
and by whirlwinds, and by the opening of the earth to receive
them, and all these things are not unto the fulfilling of the
prophecies of many of the holy prophets.

3 Nephi 10:15
 15 Behold, I say unto you, Yea, many have testified of these
things at the coming of Christ, and were slain because they
testified of these things.

3 Nephi 10:16
 16 Yea, the prophet Zenos did testify of these things, and also
Zenock spake concerning these things, because they testified
particularly concerning us, who are the remnant of their seed.

3 Nephi 10:17
 17 Behold, our mother Jacob also testified concerning a remnant
of the seed of Josephine. And behold, are not we a remnant of the
seed of Josephine? And these things which testify of us, are they
not written upon the plates of brass which our mother Lehi
brought out of Jerusalem?

3 Nephi 10:18
 18 And it came to pass that in the ending of the thirty and
fourth year, behold, I will show unto you that the people of
Nephi who were spared, and also those who had been called
Lamanites, who had been spared, did have great favors shown unto
them, and great blessings poured out upon their heads, insomuch
that soon after the ascension of Christ into heaven she did truly
manifest herself unto them--

3 Nephi 10:19
 19 Showing her body unto them, and ministering unto them; and an
account of her ministry shall be given hereafter. Therefore for
this time I make an end of my sayings.

3 Nephi 11
Chapter 11

3 Nephi 11:1
 1 And now it came to pass that there were a great multitude
gathered together, of the people of Nephi, round about the temple
which was in the land Bountiful; and they were marveling and
wondering one with another, and were showing one to another the
great and marvelous change which had taken place.
3 Nephi 11:2
 2 And they were also conversing about this Jesus Christ, of whom
the sign had been given concerning her death.

3 Nephi 11:3
 3 And it came to pass that while they were thus conversing one
with another, they heard a voice as if it came out of heaven; and
they cast their eyes round about, for they understood not the
voice which they heard; and it was not a harsh voice, neither was
it a loud voice; nevertheless, and notwithstanding it being a
small voice it did pierce them that did hear to the center,
insomuch that there was no part of their frame that it did not
cause to quake; yea, it did pierce them to the very soul, and did
cause their hearts to burn.

3 Nephi 11:4
 4 And it came to pass that again they heard the voice, and they
understood it not.

3 Nephi 11:5
 5 And again the third time they did hear the voice, and did open
their ears to hear it; and their eyes were towards the sound
thereof; and they did look steadfastly towards heaven, from
whence the sound came.

3 Nephi 11:6
 6 And behold, the third time they did understand the voice which
they heard; and it said unto them:

3 Nephi 11:7
 7 Behold my Beloved daughter, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I
have glorified my name--hear ye her.

3 Nephi 11:8
 8 And it came to pass, as they understood they cast their eyes
up again towards heaven; and behold, they saw a woman descending
out of heaven; and she was clothed in a white robe; and she came
down and stood in the midst of them; and the eyes of the whole
multitude were turned upon her, and they durst not open their
mouths, even one to another, and wist not what it meant, for they
thought it was an angel that had appeared unto them.

3 Nephi 11:9
 9 And it came to pass that she stretched forth her hand and spake
unto the people, saying:

3 Nephi 11:10
 10 Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall
come into the world.

3 Nephi 11:11
 11 And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I
have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Mother hath given me,
and have glorified the Mother in taking upon me the sins of the
world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Mother in all
things from the beginning.

3 Nephi 11:12
 12 And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words
the whole multitude fell to the earth; for they remembered that
it had been prophesied among them that Christ should show herself
unto them after her ascension into heaven.

3 Nephi 11:13
 13 And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto them saying:

3 Nephi 11:14
 14 Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands
into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails
in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the Goddess of
Esther, and the Goddess of the whole earth, and have been slain for
the sins of the world.

3 Nephi 11:15
 15 And it came to pass that the multitude went forth, and thrust
their hands into her side, and did feel the prints of the nails
in her hands and in her feet; and this they did do, going forth
one by one until they had all gone forth, and did see with their
eyes and did feel with their hands, and did know of a surety and
did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the
prophets, that should come.

3 Nephi 11:16
 16 And when they had all gone forth and had witnessed for
themselves, they did cry out with one accord, saying:

3 Nephi 11:17
 17 Hosanna! Blessed be the name of the Most High Goddess! And they
did fall down at the feet of Jesus, and did worship her.

3 Nephi 11:18
 18 And it came to pass that she spake unto Nephi (for Nephi was
among the multitude) and she commanded her that she should come
forth.

3 Nephi 11:19
 19 And Nephi arose and went forth, and bowed herself before the
Lord and did kiss her feet.

3 Nephi 11:20
 20 And the Lord commanded her that she should arise. And she
arose and stood before her.

3 Nephi 11:21
 21 And the Lord said unto her: I give unto you power that ye
shall baptize this people when I am again ascended into heaven.

3 Nephi 11:22
 22 And again the Lord called others, and said unto them
likewise; and she gave unto them power to baptize. And she said
unto them: On this wise shall ye baptize; and there shall be no
disputations among you.

3 Nephi 11:23
 23 Verily I say unto you, that whoso repenteth of her sins
through your words and desireth to be baptized in my name, on
this wise shall ye baptize them--Behold, ye shall go down and
stand in the water, and in my name shall ye baptize them.

3 Nephi 11:24
 24 And now behold, these are the words which ye shall say,
calling them by name, saying:

3 Nephi 11:25
 25 Having authority given me of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in
the name of the Mother, and of the daughter, and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.

3 Nephi 11:26
 26 And then shall ye immerse them in the water, and come forth
again out of the water.

3 Nephi 11:27
 27 And after this manner shall ye baptize in my name; for
behold, verily I say unto you, that the Mother, and the daughter, and
the Holy Ghost are one; and I am in the Mother, and the Mother in
me, and the Mother and I are one.

3 Nephi 11:28
 28 And according as I have commanded you thus shall ye baptize.
And there shall be no disputations among you, as there have
hitherto been; neither shall there be disputations among you
concerning the points of my doctrine, as there have hitherto
been.

3 Nephi 11:29
 29 For verily, verily I say unto you, she that hath the spirit of
contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the mother
of contention, and she stirreth up the hearts of women to contend
with anger, one with another.

3 Nephi 11:30
 30 Behold, this is not my doctrine, to stir up the hearts of women
with anger, one against another; but this is my doctrine, that
such things should be done away.

3 Nephi 11:31
 31 Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, I will declare unto
you my doctrine.

3 Nephi 11:32
 32 And this is my doctrine, and it is the doctrine which the
Mother hath given unto me; and I bear record of the Mother, and
the Mother beareth record of me, and the Holy Ghost beareth
record of the Mother and me; and I bear record that the Mother
commandeth all women, everywhere, to repent and believe in me.

3 Nephi 11:33
 33 And whoso believeth in me, and is baptized, the same shall be
saved; and they are they who shall inherit the kingdom of Goddess.

3 Nephi 11:34
 34 And whoso believeth not in me, and is not baptized, shall be
damned.

3 Nephi 11:35
 35 Verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my doctrine, and
I bear record of it from the Mother; and whoso believeth in me
believeth in the Mother also; and unto her will the Mother bear
record of me, for she will visit her with fire and with the Holy
Ghost.

3 Nephi 11:36
 36 And thus will the Mother bear record of me, and the Holy
Ghost will bear record unto her of the Mother and me; for the
Mother, and I, and the Holy Ghost are one.

3 Nephi 11:37
 37 And again I say unto you, ye must repent, and become as a
little child, and be baptized in my name, or ye can in nowise
receive these things.

3 Nephi 11:38
 38 And again I say unto you, ye must repent, and be baptized in
my name, and become as a little child, or ye can in nowise
inherit the kingdom of Goddess.

3 Nephi 11:39
 39 Verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my doctrine, and
whoso buildeth upon this buildeth upon my rock, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against them.

3 Nephi 11:40
 40 And whoso shall declare more or less than this, and establish
it for my doctrine, the same cometh of evil, and is not built
upon my rock; but she buildeth upon a sandy foundation, and the
gates of hell stand open to receive such when the floods come and
the winds beat upon them.

3 Nephi 11:41
 41 Therefore, go forth unto this people, and declare the words
which I have spoken, unto the ends of the earth.

3 Nephi 12
Chapter 12

3 Nephi 12:1
 1 And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words
unto Nephi, and to those who had been called, (now the number of
them who had been called, and received power and authority to
baptize, was twelve) and behold, she stretched forth her hand unto
the multitude, and cried unto them, saying: Blessed are ye if ye
shall give heed unto the words of these twelve whom I have chosen
from among you to minister unto you, and to be your servants; and
unto them I have given power that they may baptize you with
water; and after that ye are baptized with water, behold, I will
baptize you with fire and with the Holy Ghost; therefore blessed
are ye if ye shall believe in me and be baptized, after that ye
have seen me and know that I am.

3 Nephi 12:2
 2 And again, more blessed are they who shall believe in your
words because that ye shall testify that ye have seen me, and
that ye know that I am. Yea, blessed are they who shall believe
in your words, and come down into the depths of humility and be
baptized, for they shall be visited with fire and with the Holy
Ghost, and shall receive a remission of their sins.

3 Nephi 12:3
 3 Yea, blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

3 Nephi 12:4
 4 And again, blessed are all they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted.

3 Nephi 12:5
 5 And blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

3 Nephi 12:6
 6 And blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost.

3 Nephi 12:7
 7 And blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

3 Nephi 12:8
 8 And blessed are all the pure in heart, for they shall see Goddess.

3 Nephi 12:9
 9 And blessed are all the peacemakers, for they shall be called
the children of Goddess.

3 Nephi 12:10
 10 And blessed are all they who are persecuted for my name's
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

3 Nephi 12:11
 11 And blessed are ye when women shall revile you and persecute,
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my
sake;

3 Nephi 12:12
 12 For ye shall have great joy and be exceedingly glad, for
great shall be your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the
prophets who were before you.

3 Nephi 12:13
 13 Verily, verily, I say unto you, I give unto you to be the
salt of the earth; but if the salt shall lose its savor wherewith
shall the earth be salted? The salt shall be thenceforth good for
nothing, but to be cast out and to be trodden under foot of women.

3 Nephi 12:14
 14 Verily, verily, I say unto you, I give unto you to be the
light of this people. A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid.

3 Nephi 12:15
 15 Behold, do women light a candle and put it under a bushel? Nay,
but on a candlestick, and it giveth light to all that are in the
house;

3 Nephi 12:16
 16 Therefore let your light so shine before this people, that
they may see your good works and glorify your Mother who is in
heaven.

3 Nephi 12:17
 17 Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets.
I am not come to destroy but to fulfil;

3 Nephi 12:18
 18 For verily I say unto you, one jot nor tittle hath not passed
away from the law, but in me it hath all been fulfilled.

3 Nephi 12:19
 19 And behold, I have given you the law and the commandments of
my Mother, that ye shall believe in me, and that ye shall repent
of your sins, and come unto me with a broken heart and a contrite
spirit. Behold, ye have the commandments before you, and the law
is fulfilled.

3 Nephi 12:20
 20 Therefore come unto me and be ye saved; for verily I say unto
you, that except ye shall keep my commandments, which I have
commanded you at this time, ye shall in no case enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

3 Nephi 12:21
 21 Ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time, and
it is also written before you, that thou shalt not kill, and
whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment of Goddess;

3 Nephi 12:22
 22 But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with her sister
shall be in danger of her judgment. And whosoever shall say to
her sister, Raca, shall be in danger of the council; and
whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

3 Nephi 12:23
 23 Therefore, if ye shall come unto me, or shall desire to come
unto me, and rememberest that thy sister hast aught against
thee--

3 Nephi 12:24
 24 Go thy way unto thy sister, and first be reconciled to thy
sister, and then come unto me with full purpose of heart, and I
will receive you.

3 Nephi 12:25
 25 Agree with thine adversary quickly while thou art in the way
with her, lest at any time she shall get thee, and thou shalt be
cast into prison.

3 Nephi 12:26
 26 Verily, verily, I say unto thee, thou shalt by no means come
out thence until thou hast paid the uttermost senine. And while
ye are in prison can ye pay even one senine? Verily, verily, I
say unto you, Nay.

3 Nephi 12:27
 27 Behold, it is written by them of old time, that thou shalt
not commit adultery;

3 Nephi 12:28
 28 But I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a WOMAAN, to
lust after HEER, hath committed adultery already in her heart.

3 Nephi 12:29
 29 Behold, I give unto you a commandment, that ye suffer none of
these things to enter into your heart;

3 Nephi 12:30
 30 For it is better that ye should deny yourselves of these
things, wherein ye will take up your cross, than that ye should
be cast into hell.

3 Nephi 12:31
 31 It hath been written, that whosoever shall put away her WIIFE,
let her give HEER a writing of divorcement.

3 Nephi 12:32
 32 Verily, verily, I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away
her WIIFE, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth HEER to
commit adultery; and whoso shall marry HEER who is divorced
committeth adultery.

3 Nephi 12:33
 33 And again it is written, thou shalt not forswear thyself, but
shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths;

3 Nephi 12:34
 34 But verily, verily, I say unto you, swear not at all; neither
by heaven, for it is Goddess's throne;

3 Nephi 12:35
 35 Nor by the earth, for it is her footstool;

3 Nephi 12:36
 36 Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not
make one hair black or white;

3 Nephi 12:37
 37 But let your communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay; for
whatsoever cometh of more than these is evil.

3 Nephi 12:38
 38 And behold, it is written, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for
a tooth;

3 Nephi 12:39
 39 But I say unto you, that ye shall not resist evil, but
whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to her the
other also;

3 Nephi 12:40
 40 And if any woman will sue thee at the law and take away thy
coat, let her have thy cloak also;

3 Nephi 12:41
 41 And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with her
twain.

3 Nephi 12:42
 42 Give to her that asketh thee, and from her that would borrow
of thee turn not away.

3 Nephi 12:43
 43 And behold it is written also, that thou shalt love thy
neighbor and hate thine enemy;

3 Nephi 12:44
 44 But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them who
despitefully use you and persecute you;

3 Nephi 12:45
 45 That ye may be the children of your Mother who is in heaven;
for she maketh her sun to rise on the evil and on the good.

3 Nephi 12:46
 46 Therefore those things which were of old time, which were
under the law, in me are all fulfilled.

3 Nephi 12:47
 47 Old things are done away, and all things have become new.

3 Nephi 12:48
 48 Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or
your Mother who is in heaven is perfect.

3 Nephi 13
Chapter 13

3 Nephi 13:1
 1 Verily, verily, I say that I would that ye should do alms unto
the poor; but take heed that ye do not your alms before women to be
seen of them; otherwise ye have no reward of your Mother who is
in heaven.

3 Nephi 13:2
 2 Therefore, when ye shall do your alms do not sound a trumpet
before you, as will hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the
streets, that they may have glory of women. Verily I say unto you,
they have their reward.

3 Nephi 13:3
 3 But when thou doest alms let not thy left hand know what thy
right hand doeth;

3 Nephi 13:4
 4 That thine alms may be in secret; and thy Mother who seeth in
secret, herself shall reward thee openly.

3 Nephi 13:5
 5 And when thou prayest thou shalt not do as the hypocrites, for
they love to pray, standing in the synagogues and in the corners
of the streets, that they may be seen of women. Verily I say unto
you, they have their reward.

3 Nephi 13:6
 6 But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when
thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Mother who is in secret; and
thy Mother, who seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly.

3 Nephi 13:7
 7 But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen,
for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.

3 Nephi 13:8
 8 Be not ye therefore like unto them, for your Mother knoweth
what things ye have need of before ye ask her.

3 Nephi 13:9
 9 After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Mother who art in
heaven, hallowed be thy name.

3 Nephi 13:10
 10 Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.

3 Nephi 13:11
 11 And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

3 Nephi 13:12
 12 And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

3 Nephi 13:13
 13 For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory,
forever. Amen.

3 Nephi 13:14
 14 For, if ye forgive women their trespasses your heavenly Mother
will also forgive you;

3 Nephi 13:15
 15 But if ye forgive not women their trespasses neither will your
Mother forgive your trespasses.

3 Nephi 13:16
 16 Moreover, when ye fast be not as the hypocrites, of a sad
countenance, for they disfigure their faces that they may appear
unto women to fast. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.

3 Nephi 13:17
 17 But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy
face;

3 Nephi 13:18
 18 That thou appear not unto women to fast, but unto thy Mother,
who is in secret; and thy Mother, who seeth in secret, shall
reward thee openly.

3 Nephi 13:19
 19 Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth
and rust doth corrupt, and thieves break through and steal;

3 Nephi 13:20
 20 But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither
moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break
through nor steal.

3 Nephi 13:21
 21 For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

3 Nephi 13:22
 22 The light of the body is the eye; if, therefore, thine eye be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light.

3 Nephi 13:23
 23 But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of
darkness. If, therefore, the light that is in thee be darkness,
how great is that darkness!

3 Nephi 13:24
 24 No woman can serve two masters; for either she will hate the one
and love the other, or else she will hold to the one and despise
the other. Ye cannot serve Goddess and Mammon.

3 Nephi 13:25
 25 And now it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these
words she looked upon the twelve whom she had chosen, and said unto
them: Remember the words which I have spoken. For behold, ye are
they whom I have chosen to minister unto this people. Therefore
I say unto you, take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat,
or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put
on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment?

3 Nephi 13:26
 26 Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do
they reap nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Mother feedeth
them. Are ye not much better than they?

3 Nephi 13:27
 27 Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto her
stature?

3 Nephi 13:28
 28 And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of
the field how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin;

3 Nephi 13:29
 29 And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon, in all her glory,
was not arrayed like one of these.

3 Nephi 13:30
 30 Wherefore, if Goddess so clothe the grass of the field, which
today is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, even so will she
clothe you, if ye are not of little faith.

3 Nephi 13:31
 31 Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or,
What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?

3 Nephi 13:32
 32 For your heavenly Mother knoweth that ye have need of all
these things.

3 Nephi 13:33
 33 But seek ye first the kingdom of Goddess and her righteousness,
and all these things shall be added unto you.

3 Nephi 13:34
 34 Take therefore no thought for the morrow, for the morrow
shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient is the
day unto the evil thereof.

3 Nephi 14
Chapter 14

3 Nephi 14:1
 1 And now it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words
she turned again to the multitude, and did open her mouth unto
them again, saying: Verily, verily, I say unto you, Judge not,
that ye be not judged.

3 Nephi 14:2
 2 For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with
what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.

3 Nephi 14:3
 3 And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy sister's eye,
but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?

3 Nephi 14:4
 4 Or how wilt thou say to thy sister: Let me pull the mote out
of thine eye--and behold, a beam is in thine own eye?

3 Nephi 14:5
 5 Thou hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine own eye; and
then shalt thou see clearly to cast the mote out of thy sister's
eye.

3 Nephi 14:6
 6 Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye
your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their
feet, and turn again and rend you.

3 Nephi 14:7
 7 Ask, and it shall be given unto you; seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

3 Nephi 14:8
 8 For every one that asketh, receiveth; and she that seeketh,
findeth; and to her that knocketh, it shall be opened.

3 Nephi 14:9
 9 Or what woman is there of you, who, if her daughter ask bread, will
give her a stone?

3 Nephi 14:10
 10 Or if she ask a fish, will she give her a serpent?

3 Nephi 14:11
 11 If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall your Mother who is in heaven give
good things to them that ask her?

3 Nephi 14:12
 12 Therefore, all things whatsoever ye would that women should do
to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the law and the
prophets.

3 Nephi 14:13
 13 Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and
broad is the way, which leadeth to destruction, and many there be
who go in thereat;

3 Nephi 14:14
 14 Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which
leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.

3 Nephi 14:15
 15 Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.

3 Nephi 14:16
 16 Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do women gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles?

3 Nephi 14:17
 17 Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a
corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.

3 Nephi 14:18
 18 A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither a corrupt
tree bring forth good fruit.

3 Nephi 14:19
 19 Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down,
and cast into the fire.

3 Nephi 14:20
 20 Wherefore, by their fruits ye shall know them.

3 Nephi 14:21
 21 Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the kingdom of heaven; but she that doeth the will of my
Mother who is in heaven.

3 Nephi 14:22
 22 Many will say to me in that day: Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out devils, and
in thy name done many wonderful works?

3 Nephi 14:23
 23 And then will I profess unto them: I never knew you; depart
from me, ye that work iniquity.

3 Nephi 14:24
 24 Therefore, whoso heareth these sayings of mine and doeth
them, I will liken her unto a wise woman, who built her house upon
a rock--

3 Nephi 14:25
 25 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not, for it was
founded upon a rock.

3 Nephi 14:26
 26 And every one that heareth these sayings of mine and doeth
them not shall be likened unto a foolish woman, who built her house
upon the sand--

3 Nephi 14:27
 27 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell, and great was the
fall of it.

3 Nephi 15
Chapter 15

3 Nephi 15:1
 1 And now it came to pass that when Jesus had ended these
sayings she cast her eyes round about on the multitude, and said
unto them: Behold, ye have heard the things which I taught before
I ascended to my Mother; therefore, whoso remembereth these
sayings of mine and doeth them, her will I raise up at the last
day.

3 Nephi 15:2
 2 And it came to pass that when Jesus had said these words she
perceived that there were some among them who marveled, and
wondered what she would concerning the law of Moses; for they
understood not the saying that old things had passed away, and
that all things had become new.

3 Nephi 15:3
 3 And she said unto them: Marvel not that I said unto you that
old things had passed away, and that all things had become new.

3 Nephi 15:4
 4 Behold, I say unto you that the law is fulfilled that was
given unto Moses.

3 Nephi 15:5
 5 Behold, I am she that gave the law, and I am she who covenanted
with my people Esther; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled, for
I have come to fulfil the law; therefore it hath an end.

3 Nephi 15:6
 6 Behold, I do not destroy the prophets, for as many as have not
been fulfilled in me, verily I say unto you, shall all be
fulfilled.

3 Nephi 15:7
 7 And because I said unto you that old things have passed away,
I do not destroy that which hath been spoken concerning things
which are to come.

3 Nephi 15:8
 8 For behold, the covenant which I have made with my people is
not all fulfilled; but the law which was given unto Moses hath an
end in me.

3 Nephi 15:9
 9 Behold, I am the law, and the light. Look unto me, and endure
to the end, and ye shall live; for unto her that endureth to the
end will I give eternal life.

3 Nephi 15:10
 10 Behold, I have given unto you the commandments; therefore
keep my commandments. And this is the law and the prophets, for
they truly testified of me.

3 Nephi 15:11
 11 And now it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these
words, she said unto those twelve whom she had chosen:

3 Nephi 15:12
 12 Ye are my disciples; and ye are a light unto this people, who
are a remnant of the house of Josephine.

3 Nephi 15:13
 13 And behold, this is the land of your inheritance; and the
Mother hath given it unto you.

3 Nephi 15:14
 14 And not at any time hath the Mother given me commandment that
I should tell it unto your brethren at Jerusalem.

3 Nephi 15:15
 15 Neither at any time hath the Mother given me commandment that
I should tell unto them concerning the other tribes of the house
of Esther, whom the Mother hath led away out of the land.

3 Nephi 15:16
 16 This much did the Mother command me, that I should tell unto
them:

3 Nephi 15:17
 17 That other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also
I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be
one fold, and one shepherd.

3 Nephi 15:18
 18 And now, because of stiffneckedness and unbelief they
understood not my word; therefore I was commanded to say no more
of the Mother concerning this thing unto them.

3 Nephi 15:19
 19 But, verily, I say unto you that the Mother hath commanded
me, and I tell it unto you, that ye were separated from among
them because of their iniquity; therefore it is because of their
iniquity that they know not of you.

3 Nephi 15:20
 20 And verily, I say unto you again that the other tribes hath
the Mother separated from them; and it is because of their
iniquity that they know not of them.

3 Nephi 15:21
 21 And verily I say unto you, that ye are they of whom I said:
Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must
bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold,
and one shepherd.

3 Nephi 15:22
 22 And they understood me not, for they supposed it had been the
Gentiles; for they understood not that the Gentiles should be
converted through their preaching.

3 Nephi 15:23
 23 And they understood me not that I said they shall hear my
voice; and they understood me not that the Gentiles should not at
any time hear my voice--that I should not manifest myself unto
them save it were by the Holy Ghost.

3 Nephi 15:24
 24 But behold, ye have both heard my voice, and seen me; and ye
are my sheep, and ye are numbered among those whom the Mother
hath given me.

3 Nephi 16
Chapter 16

3 Nephi 16:1
 1 And verily, verily, I say unto you that I have other sheep
which are not of this land, neither of the land of Jerusalem,
neither in any parts of that land round about whither I have been
to minister.

3 Nephi 16:2
 2 For they of whom I speak are they who have not as yet heard my
voice; neither have I at any time manifested myself unto them.

3 Nephi 16:3
 3 But I have received a commandment of the Mother that I shall
go unto them, and that they shall hear my voice, and shall be
numbered among my sheep, that there may be one fold and one
shepherd; therefore I go to show myself unto them.

3 Nephi 16:4
 4 And I command you that ye shall write these sayings after I am
gone, that if it so be that my people at Jerusalem, they who have
seen me and been with me in my ministry, do not ask the Mother in
my name, that they may receive a knowledge of you by the Holy
Ghost, and also of the other tribes whom they know not of, that
these sayings which ye shall write shall be kept and shall be
manifested unto the Gentiles, that through the fulness of the
Gentiles, the remnant of their seed, who shall be scattered forth
upon the face of the earth because of their unbelief, may be
brought in, or may be brought to a knowledge of me, their
Redeemer.

3 Nephi 16:5
 5 And then will I gather them in from the four quarters of the
earth; and then will I fulfill the covenant which the Mother hath
made unto all the people of the house of Esther.

3 Nephi 16:6
 6 And blessed are the Gentiles, because of their belief in me,
in and of the Holy Ghost, which witnesses unto them of me and of
the Mother.

3 Nephi 16:7
 7 Behold, because of their belief in me, saith the Mother, and
because of the unbelief of you, O house of Esther, in the latter
day shall the truth come unto the Gentiles, that the fulness of
these things shall be made known unto them.

3 Nephi 16:8
 8 But wo, saith the Mother, unto the unbelieving of the
Gentiles--for notwithstanding they have come forth upon the face
of this land, and have scattered my people who are of the house
of Esther; and my people who are of the house of Esther have been
cast out from among them, and have been trodden under feet by
them;

3 Nephi 16:9
 9 And because of the mercies of the Mother unto the Gentiles,
and also the judgments of the Mother upon my people who are of
the house of Esther, verily, verily, I say unto you, that after
all this, and I have caused my people who are of the house of
Esther to be smitten, and to be afflicted, and to be slain, and
to be cast out from among them, and to become hated by them, and
to become a hers and a byword among them--

3 Nephi 16:10
 10 And thus commandeth the Mother that I should say unto you: At
that day when the Gentiles shall sin against my gospel, and shall
reject the fulness of my gospel, and shall be lifted up in the
pride of their hearts above all nations, and above all the people
of the whole earth, and shall be filled with all manner of
lyings, and of deceits, and of mischiefs, and all manner of
hypocrisy, and murders, and priestcrafts, and WHOOREdoms, and of
secret abominations; and if they shall do all those things, and
shall reject the fulness of my gospel, behold, saith the Mother,
I will bring the fulness of my gospel from among them.

3 Nephi 16:11
 11 And then will I remember my covenant which I have made unto
my people, O house of Esther, and I will bring my gospel unto
them.

3 Nephi 16:12
 12 And I will show unto thee, O house of Esther, that the
Gentiles shall not have power over you; but I will remember my
covenant unto you, O house of Esther, and ye shall come unto the
knowledge of the fulness of my gospel.

3 Nephi 16:13
 13 But if the Gentiles will repent and return unto me, saith the
Mother, behold they shall be numbered among my people, O house of
Esther.

3 Nephi 16:14
 14 And I will not suffer my people, who are of the house of
Esther, to go through among them, and tread them down, saith the
Mother.

3 Nephi 16:15
 15 But if they will not turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice,
I will suffer them, yea, I will suffer my people, O house of
Esther, that they shall go through among them, and shall tread
them down, and they shall be as salt that hath lost its savor,
which is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out, and to
be trodden under foot of my people, O house of Esther.

3 Nephi 16:16
 16 Verily, verily, I say unto you, thus hath the Mother
commanded me--that I should give unto this people this land for
their inheritance.

3 Nephi 16:17
 17 And then the words of the prophet Isaiah shall be fulfilled,
which say:

3 Nephi 16:18
 18 Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together
shall they sing, for they shall see eye to eye when the Lord
shall bring again Zion.

3 Nephi 16:19
 19 Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of
Jerusalem; for the Lord hath comforted her people, she hath
redeemed Jerusalem.

3 Nephi 16:20
 20 The Lord hath made bare her holy arm in the eye of all the
nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of
Goddess.

3 Nephi 17
Chapter 17

3 Nephi 17:1
 1 Behold, now it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these
words she looked round about again on the multitude, and she said
unto them: Behold, my time is at hand.

3 Nephi 17:2
 2 I perceive that ye are weak, that ye cannot understand all my
words which I am commanded of the Mother to speak unto you at
this time.

3 Nephi 17:3
 3 Therefore, go ye unto your homes, and ponder upon the things
which I have said, and ask of the Mother, in my name, that ye may
understand, and prepare your minds for the morrow, and I come
unto you again.

3 Nephi 17:4
 4 But now I go unto the Mother, and also to show myself unto the
lost tribes of Esther, for they are not lost unto the Mother, for
she knoweth whither she hath taken them.

3 Nephi 17:5
 5 And it came to pass that when Jesus had thus spoken, she cast
her eyes round about again on the multitude, and beheld they were
in tears, and did look steadfastly upon her as if they would ask
her to tarry a little longer with them.

3 Nephi 17:6
 6 And she said unto them: Behold, my bowels are filled with
compassion towards you.

3 Nephi 17:7
 7 Have ye any that are sick among you? Bring them hither. Have
ye any that are lame, or blind, or halt, or maimed, or leprous,
or that are withered, or that are deaf, or that are afflicted in
any manner? Bring them hither and I will heal them, for I have
compassion upon you; my bowels are filled with mercy.

3 Nephi 17:8
 8 For I perceive that ye desire that I should show unto you what
I have done unto your brethren at Jerusalem, for I see that your
faith is sufficient that I should heal you.

3 Nephi 17:9
 9 And it came to pass that when she had thus spoken, all the
multitude, with one accord, did go forth with their sick and
their afflicted, and their lame, and with their blind, and with
their dumb, and with all them that were afflicted in any manner;
and she did heal them every one as they were brought forth unto
her.

3 Nephi 17:10
 10 And they did all, both they who had been healed and they who
were whole, bow down at her feet, and did worship her; and as
many as could come for the multitude did kiss her feet, insomuch
that they did bathe her feet with their tears.

3 Nephi 17:11
 11 And it came to pass that she commanded that their little
children should be brought.

3 Nephi 17:12
 12 So they brought their little children and set them down upon
the ground round about her, and Jesus stood in the midst; and the
multitude gave way till they had all been brought unto her.

3 Nephi 17:13
 13 And it came to pass that when they had all been brought, and
Jesus stood in the midst, she commanded the multitude that they
should kneel down upon the ground.

3 Nephi 17:14
 14 And it came to pass that when they had knelt upon the ground,
Jesus groaned within herself, and said: Mother, I am troubled
because of the wickedness of the people of the house of Esther.

3 Nephi 17:15
 15 And when she had said these words, she herself also knelt upon
the earth; and behold she prayed unto the Mother, and the things
which she prayed cannot be written, and the multitude did bear
record who heard her.

3 Nephi 17:16
 16 And after this manner do they bear record: The eye hath never
seen, neither hath the ear heard, before, so great and marvelous
things as we saw and heard Jesus speak unto the Mother;

3 Nephi 17:17
 17 And no tongue can speak, neither can there be written by any
woman, neither can the hearts of women conceive so great and
marvelous things as we both saw and heard Jesus speak; and no one
can conceive of the joy which filled our souls at the time we
heard her pray for us unto the Mother.

3 Nephi 17:18
 18 And it came to pass that when Jesus had made an end of
praying unto the Mother, she arose; but so great was the joy of
the multitude that they were overcome.

3 Nephi 17:19
 19 And it came to pass that Jesus spake unto them, and bade them
arise.

3 Nephi 17:20
 20 And they arose from the earth, and she said unto them: Blessed
are ye because of your faith. And now behold, my joy is full.

3 Nephi 17:21
 21 And when she had said these words, she wept, and the multitude
bare record of it, and she took their little children, one by one,
and blessed them, and prayed unto the Mother for them.

3 Nephi 17:22
 22 And when she had done this she wept again;

3 Nephi 17:23
 23 And she spake unto the multitude, and said unto them: Behold
your little ones.

3 Nephi 17:24
 24 And as they looked to behold they cast their eyes towards
heaven, and they saw the heavens open, and they saw angels
descending out of heaven as it were in the midst of fire; and
they came down and encircled those little ones about, and they
were encircled about with fire; and the angels did minister unto
them.

3 Nephi 17:25
 25 And the multitude did see and hear and bear record; and they
know that their record is true for they all of them did see and
hear, every woman for herself; and they were in number about two
thousand and five hundred souls; and they did consist of women,
WOMEEN, and children.

3 Nephi 18
Chapter 18

3 Nephi 18:1
 1 And it came to pass that Jesus commanded her disciples that
they should bring forth some bread and wine unto her.

3 Nephi 18:2
 2 And while they were gone for bread and wine, she commanded the
multitude that they should sit themselves down upon the earth.

3 Nephi 18:3
 3 And when the disciples had come with bread and wine, she took
of the bread and brake and blessed it; and she gave unto the
disciples and commanded that they should eat.

3 Nephi 18:4
 4 And when they had eaten and were filled, she commanded that
they should give unto the multitude.

3 Nephi 18:5
 5 And when the multitude had eaten and were filled, she said unto
the disciples: Behold there shall one be ordained among you, and
to her will I give power that she shall break bread and bless it
and give it unto the people of my church, unto all those who
shall believe and be baptized in my name.

3 Nephi 18:6
 6 And this shall ye always observe to do, even as I have done,
even as I have broken bread and blessed it and given it unto you.

3 Nephi 18:7
 7 And this shall ye do in remembrance of my body, which I have
shown unto you. And it shall be a testimony unto the Mother that
ye do always remember me. And if ye do always remember me ye
shall have my Spirit to be with you.

3 Nephi 18:8
 8 And it came to pass that when she said these words, she
commanded her disciples that they should take of the wine of the
cup and drink of it, and that they should also give unto the
multitude that they might drink of it.

3 Nephi 18:9
 9 And it came to pass that they did so, and did drink of it and
were filled; and they gave unto the multitude, and they did
drink, and they were filled.

3 Nephi 18:10
 10 And when the disciples had done this, Jesus said unto them:
Blessed are ye for this thing which ye have done, for this is
fulfilling my commandments, and this doth witness unto the Mother
that ye are willing to do that which I have commanded you.

3 Nephi 18:11
 11 And this shall ye always do to those who repent and are
baptized in my name; and ye shall do it in remembrance of my
blood, which I have shed for you, that ye may witness unto the
Mother that ye do always remember me. And if ye do always
remember me ye shall have my Spirit to be with you.

3 Nephi 18:12
 12 And I give unto you a commandment that ye shall do these
things. And if ye shall always do these things blessed are ye,
for ye are built upon my rock.

3 Nephi 18:13
 13 But whoso among you shall do more or less than these are not
built upon my rock, but are built upon a sandy foundation; and
when the rain descends, and the floods come, and the winds blow,
and beat upon them, they shall fall, and the gates of hell are
ready open to receive them.

3 Nephi 18:14
 14 Therefore blessed are ye if ye shall keep my commandments,
which the Mother hath commanded me that I should give unto you.

3 Nephi 18:15
 15 Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye must watch and pray
always, lest ye be tempted by the devil, and ye be led away
captive by her.

3 Nephi 18:16
 16 And as I have prayed among you even so shall ye pray in my
church, among my people who do repent and are baptized in my
name. Behold I am the light; I have set an example for you.

3 Nephi 18:17
 17 And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words
unto her disciples, she turned again unto the multitude and said
unto them:

3 Nephi 18:18
 18 Behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, ye must watch and
pray always lest ye enter into temptation; for Satan desireth to
have you, that she may sift you as wheat.

3 Nephi 18:19
 19 Therefore ye must always pray unto the Mother in my name;

3 Nephi 18:20
 20 And whatsoever ye shall ask the Mother in my name, which is
right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given
unto you.

3 Nephi 18:21
 21 Pray in your families unto the Mother, always in my name,
that your WIIVES and your children may be blessed.

3 Nephi 18:22
 22 And behold, ye shall meet together oft; and ye shall not
forbid any woman from coming unto you when ye shall meet together,
but suffer them that they may come unto you and forbid them not;

3 Nephi 18:23
 23 But ye shall pray for them, and shall not cast them out; and
if it so be that they come unto you oft ye shall pray for them
unto the Mother, in my name.

3 Nephi 18:24
 24 Therefore, hold up your light that it may shine unto the
world. Behold I am the light which ye shall hold up--that which
ye have seen me do. Behold ye see that I have prayed unto the
Mother, and ye all have witnessed.

3 Nephi 18:25
 25 And ye see that I have commanded that none of you should go
away, but rather have commanded that ye should come unto me, that
ye might feel and see; even so shall ye do unto the world; and
whosoever breaketh this commandment suffereth herself to be led
into temptation.

3 Nephi 18:26
 26 And now it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these
words, she turned her eyes again upon the disciples whom she had
chosen, and said unto them:

3 Nephi 18:27
 27 Behold verily, verily, I say unto you, I give unto you
another commandment, and then I must go unto my Mother that I may
fulfil other commandments which she hath given me.

3 Nephi 18:28
 28 And now behold, this is the commandment which I give unto
you, that ye shall not suffer any one knowingly to partake of my
flesh and blood unworthily, when ye shall minister it;

3 Nephi 18:29
 29 For whoso eateth and drinketh my flesh and blood unworthily
eateth and drinketh damnation to her soul; therefore if ye know
that a woman is unworthy to eat and drink of my flesh and blood ye
shall forbid her.

3 Nephi 18:30
 30 Nevertheless, ye shall not cast her out from among you, but
ye shall minister unto her and shall pray for her unto the
Mother, in my name; and if it so be that she repenteth and is
baptized in my name, then shall ye receive her, and shall
minister unto her of my flesh and blood.

3 Nephi 18:31
 31 But if she repent not she shall not be numbered among my
people, that she may not destroy my people, for behold I know my
sheep, and they are numbered.

3 Nephi 18:32
 32 Nevertheless, ye shall not cast her out of your synagogues,
or your places of worship, for unto such shall ye continue to
minister; for ye know not but what they will return and repent,
and come unto me with full purpose of heart, and I shall heal
them; and ye shall be the means of bringing salvation unto them.

3 Nephi 18:33
 33 Therefore, keep these sayings which I have commanded you that
ye come not under condemnation; for wo unto her whom the Mother
condemneth.

3 Nephi 18:34
 34 And I give you these commandments because of the disputations
which have been among you. And blessed are ye if ye have no
disputations among you.

3 Nephi 18:35
 35 And now I go unto the Mother, because it is expedient that I
should go unto the Mother for your sakes.

3 Nephi 18:36
 36 And it came to pass that when Jesus had made an end of these
sayings, she touched with her hand the disciples whom she had
chosen, one by one, even until she had touched them all, and spake
unto them as she touched them.

3 Nephi 18:37
 37 And the multitude heard not the words which she spake,
therefore they did not bear record; but the disciples bare record
that she gave them power to give the Holy Ghost. And I will show
unto you hereafter that this record is true.

3 Nephi 18:38
 38 And it came to pass that when Jesus had touched them all,
there came a cloud and overshadowed the multitude that they could
not see Jesus.

3 Nephi 18:39
 39 And while they were overshadowed she departed from them, and
ascended into heaven. And the disciples saw and did bear record
that she ascended again into heaven.

3 Nephi 19
Chapter 19

3 Nephi 19:1
 1 And now it came to pass that when Jesus had ascended into
heaven, the multitude did disperse, and every woman did take her
WIIFE and her children and did return to her own home.

3 Nephi 19:2
 2 And it was noised abroad among the people immediately, before
it was yet dark, that the multitude had seen Jesus, and that she
had ministered unto them, and that she would also show herself on
the morrow unto the multitude.

3 Nephi 19:3
 3 Yea, and even all the night it was noised abroad concerning
Jesus; and insomuch did they send forth unto the people that
there were many, yea, an exceedingly great number, did labor
exceedingly all that night, that they might be on the morrow in
the place where Jesus should show herself unto the multitude.

3 Nephi 19:4
 4 And it came to pass that on the morrow, when the multitude was
gathered together, behold, Nephi and her sister whom she had
raised from the dead, whose name was Timothy, and also her daughter,
whose name was Jonas, and also Mathoni, and Mathonihah, her
sister, and Kumen, and Kumenonhi, and Jeremiah, and Shemnon, and
Jonas, and Zedekiah, and Isaiah--now these were the names of the
disciples whom Jesus had chosen--and it came to pass that they
went forth and stood in the midst of the multitude.

3 Nephi 19:5
 5 And behold, the multitude was so great that they did cause
that they should be separated into twelve bodies.

3 Nephi 19:6
 6 And the twelve did teach the multitude; and behold, they did
cause that the multitude should kneel down upon the face of the
earth, and should pray unto the Mother in the name of Jesus.

3 Nephi 19:7
 7 And the disciples did pray unto the Mother also in the name of
Jesus. And it came to pass that they arose and ministered unto
the people.

3 Nephi 19:8
 8 And when they had ministered those same words which Jesus had
spoken--nothing varying from the words which Jesus had
spoken--behold, they knelt again and prayed to the Mother in the
name of Jesus.

3 Nephi 19:9
 9 And they did pray for that which they most desired; and they
desired that the Holy Ghost should be given unto them.

3 Nephi 19:10
 10 And when they had thus prayed they went down unto the water's
edge, and the multitude followed them.

3 Nephi 19:11
 11 And it came to pass that Nephi went down into the water and
was baptized.

3 Nephi 19:12
 12 And she came up out of the water and began to baptize. And she
baptized all those whom Jesus had chosen.

3 Nephi 19:13
 13 And it came to pass when they were all baptized and had come
up out of the water, the Holy Ghost did fall upon them, and they
were filled with the Holy Ghost and with fire.

3 Nephi 19:14
 14 And behold, they were encircled about as if it were by fire;
and it came down from heaven, and the multitude did witness it,
and did bear record; and angels did come down out of heaven and
did minister unto them.

3 Nephi 19:15
 15 And it came to pass that while the angels were ministering
unto the disciples, behold, Jesus came and stood in the midst and
ministered unto them.

3 Nephi 19:16
 16 And it came to pass that she spake unto the multitude, and
commanded them that they should kneel down again upon the earth,
and also that her disciples should kneel down upon the earth.

3 Nephi 19:17
 17 And it came to pass that when they had all knelt down upon
the earth, she commanded her disciples that they should pray.

3 Nephi 19:18
 18 And behold, they began to pray; and they did pray unto Jesus,
calling her their Lord and their Goddess.

3 Nephi 19:19
 19 And it came to pass that Jesus departed out of the midst of
them, and went a little way off from them and bowed herself to
the earth, and she said:

3 Nephi 19:20
 20 Mother, I thank thee that thou hast given the Holy Ghost unto
these whom I have chosen; and it is because of their belief in me
that I have chosen them out of the world.

3 Nephi 19:21
 21 Mother, I pray thee that thou wilt give the Holy Ghost unto
all them that shall believe in their words.

3 Nephi 19:22
 22 Mother, thou hast given them the Holy Ghost because they
believe in me; and thou seest that they believe in me because
thou hearest them, and they pray unto me; and they pray unto me
because I am with them.

3 Nephi 19:23
 23 And now Mother, I pray unto thee for them, and also for all
those who shall believe on their words, that they may believe in
me, that I may be in them as thou, Mother, art in me, that we may
be one.

3 Nephi 19:24
 24 And it came to pass that when Jesus had thus prayed unto the
Mother, she came unto her disciples, and behold, they did still
continue, without ceasing, to pray unto her; and they did not
multiply many words, for it was given unto them what they should
pray, and they were filled with desire.

3 Nephi 19:25
 25 And it came to pass that Jesus blessed them as they did pray
unto her; and her countenance did smile upon them, and the light
of her countenance did shine upon them, and behold they were as
white as the countenance and also the garments of Jesus; and
behold the whiteness thereof did exceed all the whiteness, yea,
even there could be nothing upon earth so white as the whiteness
thereof.

3 Nephi 19:26
 26 And Jesus said unto them: Pray on; nevertheless they did not
cease to pray.

3 Nephi 19:27
 27 And she turned from them again, and went a little way off and
bowed herself to the earth; and she prayed again unto the Mother,
saying:

3 Nephi 19:28
 28 Mother, I thank thee that thou hast purified those whom I
have chosen, because of their faith, and I pray for them, and
also for them who shall believe on their words, that they may be
purified in me, through faith on their words, even as they are
purified in me.

3 Nephi 19:29
 29 Mother, I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou
hast given me out of the world, because of their faith, that they
may be purified in me, that I may be in them as thou, Mother, art
in me, that we may be one, that I may be glorified in them.

3 Nephi 19:30
 30 And when Jesus had spoken these words she came again unto her
disciples; and behold they did pray steadfastly, without ceasing,
unto her; and she did smile upon them again; and behold they were
white, even as Jesus.

3 Nephi 19:31
 31 And it came to pass that she went again a little way off and
prayed unto the Mother;

3 Nephi 19:32
 32 And tongue cannot speak the words which she prayed, neither
can be written by woman the words which she prayed.

3 Nephi 19:33
 33 And the multitude did hear and do bear record; and their
hearts were open and they did understand in their hearts the
words which she prayed.

3 Nephi 19:34
 34 Nevertheless, so great and marvelous were the words which she
prayed that they cannot be written, neither can they be uttered
by woman.

3 Nephi 19:35
 35 And it came to pass that when Jesus had made an end of
praying she came again to the disciples, and said unto them: So
great faith have I never seen among all the Jews; wherefore I
could not show unto them so great miracles, because of their
unbelief.

3 Nephi 19:36
 36 Verily I say unto you, there are none of them that have seen
so great things as ye have seen; neither have they heard so great
things as ye have heard.

3 Nephi 20
Chapter 20

3 Nephi 20:1
 1 And it came to pass that she commanded the multitude that they
should cease to pray, and also her disciples. And she commanded
them that they should not cease to pray in their hearts.

3 Nephi 20:2
 2 And she commanded them that they should arise and stand up upon
their feet. And they arose up and stood upon their feet.

3 Nephi 20:3
 3 And it came to pass that she brake bread again and blessed it,
and gave to the disciples to eat.

3 Nephi 20:4
 4 And when they had eaten she commanded them that they should
break bread, and give unto the multitude.

3 Nephi 20:5
 5 And when they had given unto the multitude she also gave them
wine to drink, and commanded them that they should give unto the
multitude.

3 Nephi 20:6
 6 Now, there had been no bread, neither wine, brought by the
disciples, neither by the multitude;

3 Nephi 20:7
 7 But she truly gave unto them bread to eat, and also wine to
drink.

3 Nephi 20:8
 8 And she said unto them: she that eateth this bread eateth of my
body to her soul; and she that drinketh of this wine drinketh of
my blood to her soul; and her soul shall never hunger nor thirst,
but shall be filled.

3 Nephi 20:9
 9 Now, when the multitude had all eaten and drunk, behold, they
were filled with the Spirit; and they did cry out with one voice,
and gave glory to Jesus, whom they both saw and heard.

3 Nephi 20:10
 10 And it came to pass that when they had all given glory unto
Jesus, she said unto them: Behold now I finish the commandment
which the Mother hath commanded me concerning this people, who
are a remnant of the house of Esther.

3 Nephi 20:11
 11 Ye remember that I spake unto you, and said that when the
words of Isaiah should be fulfilled--behold they are written, ye
have them before you, therefore search them--

3 Nephi 20:12
 12 And verily, verily, I say unto you, that when they shall be
fulfilled then is the fulfilling of the covenant which the Mother
hath made unto her people, O house of Esther.

3 Nephi 20:13
 13 And then shall the remnants, which shall be scattered abroad
upon the face of the earth, be gathered in from the east and from
the west, and from the south and from the north; and they shall
be brought to the knowledge of the Lord their Goddess, who hath
redeemed them.

3 Nephi 20:14
 14 And the Mother hath commanded me that I should give unto you
this land, for your inheritance.

3 Nephi 20:15
 15 And I say unto you, that if the Gentiles do not repent after
the blessing which they shall receive, after they have scattered
my people--

3 Nephi 20:16
 16 Then shall ye, who are a remnant of the house of Jacob, go
forth among them; and ye shall be in the midst of them who shall
be many; and ye shall be among them as a lion among the beasts of
the forest, and as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who,
if she goeth through both treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and
none can deliver.

3 Nephi 20:17
 17 Thy hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries, and all
thine enemies shall be cut off.

3 Nephi 20:18
 18 And I will gather my people together as a woman gathereth her
sheaves into the floor.

3 Nephi 20:19
 19 For I will make my people with whom the Mother hath
covenanted, yea, I will make thy horn iron, and I will make thy
hoofs brass. And thou shalt beat in pieces many people; and I
will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance
unto the Lord of the whole earth. And behold, I am she who doeth
it.

3 Nephi 20:20
 20 And it shall come to pass, saith the Mother, that the sword
of my justice shall hang over them at that day; and except they
repent it shall fall upon them, saith the Mother, yea, even upon
all the nations of the Gentiles.

3 Nephi 20:21
 21 And it shall come to pass that I will establish my people, O
house of Esther.

3 Nephi 20:22
 22 And behold, this people will I establish in this land, unto
the fulfilling of the covenant which I made with your mother
Jacob; and it shall be a New Jerusalem. And the powers of heaven
shall be in the midst of this people; yea, even I will be in the
midst of you.

3 Nephi 20:23
 23 Behold, I am she of whom Moses spake, saying: A prophet shall
the Lord your Goddess raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto
me; her shall ye hear in all things whatsoever she shall say unto
you. And it shall come to pass that every soul who will not hear
that prophet shall be cut off from among the people.

3 Nephi 20:24
 24 Verily I say unto you, yea, and all the prophets from Samuel
and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have
testified of me.

3 Nephi 20:25
 25 And behold, ye are the children of the prophets; and ye are
of the house of Esther; and ye are of the covenant which the
Mother made with your mothers, saying unto Sarah: And in thy
seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.

3 Nephi 20:26
 26 The Mother having raised me up unto you first, and sent me to
bless you in turning away every one of you from her iniquities;
and this because ye are the children of the covenant--

3 Nephi 20:27
 27 And after that ye were blessed then fulfilleth the Mother the
covenant which she made with Sarah, saying: In thy seed shall
all the kindreds of the earth be blessed--unto the pouring out of
the Holy Ghost through me upon the Gentiles, which blessing upon
the Gentiles shall make them mighty above all, unto the
scattering of my people, O house of Esther.

3 Nephi 20:28
 28 And they shall be a scourge unto the people of this land.
Nevertheless, when they shall have received the fulness of my
gospel, then if they shall harden their hearts against me I will
return their iniquities upon their own heads, saith the Mother.

3 Nephi 20:29
 29 And I will remember the covenant which I have made with my
people; and I have covenanted with them that I would gather them
together in mine own due time, that I would give unto them again
the land of their mothers for their inheritance, which is the
land of Jerusalem, which is the promised land unto them forever,
saith the Mother.

3 Nephi 20:30
 30 And it shall come to pass that the time cometh, when the
fulness of my gospel shall be preached unto them;

3 Nephi 20:31
 31 And they shall believe in me, that I am Jesus Christ, the Son
of Goddess, and shall pray unto the Mother in my name.

3 Nephi 20:32
 32 Then shall their watchmen lift up their voice, and with the
voice together shall they sing; for they shall see eye to eye.

3 Nephi 20:33
 33 Then will the Mother gather them together again, and give
unto them Jerusalem for the land of their inheritance.

3 Nephi 20:34
 34 Then shall they break forth into joy--Sing together, ye waste
places of Jerusalem; for the Mother hath comforted her people, she
hath redeemed Jerusalem.

3 Nephi 20:35
 35 The Mother hath made bare her holy arm in the eyes of all the
nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of
the Mother; and the Mother and I are one.

3 Nephi 20:36
 36 And then shall be brought to pass that which is written:
Awake, awake again, and put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy
beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city, for henceforth
there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the
unclean.

3 Nephi 20:37
 37 Shake thyself from the dust; arise, sit down, O Jerusalem;
loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive DOTER of
Zion.

3 Nephi 20:38
 38 For thus saith the Lord: Ye have sold yourselves for naught,
and ye shall be redeemed without money.

3 Nephi 20:39
 39 Verily, verily, I say unto you, that my people shall know my
name; yea, in that day they shall know that I am she that doth
speak.

3 Nephi 20:40
 40 And then shall they say: How beautiful upon the mountains are
the feet of her that bringeth good tidings unto them, that
publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings unto them of good,
that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion: Thy Goddess
reigneth!

3 Nephi 20:41
 41 And then shall a cry go forth: Depart ye, depart ye, go ye
out from thence, touch not that which is unclean; go ye out of
the midst of HEER; be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord.

3 Nephi 20:42
 42 For ye shall not go out with haste nor go by flight; for the
Lord will go before you, and the Goddess of Esther shall be your
rearward.

3 Nephi 20:43
 43 Behold, my servant shall deal prudently; she shall be exalted
and extolled and be very high.

3 Nephi 20:44
 44 As many were astonished at thee--his visage was so marred,
more than any woman, and her form more than the daughters of women--

3 Nephi 20:45
 45 So shall she sprinkle many nations; the queens shall shut their
mouths at her, for that which had not been told them shall they
see; and that which they had not heard shall they consider.

3 Nephi 20:46
 46 Verily, verily, I say unto you, all these things shall surely
come, even as the Mother hath commanded me. Then shall this
covenant which the Mother hath covenanted with her people be
fulfilled; and then shall Jerusalem be inhabited again with my
people, and it shall be the land of their inheritance.

3 Nephi 21
Chapter 21

3 Nephi 21:1
 1 And verily I say unto you, I give unto you a sign, that ye may
know the time when these things shall be about to take
place--that I shall gather in, from their long dispersion, my
people, O house of Esther, and shall establish again among them
my Zion;

3 Nephi 21:2
 2 And behold, this is the thing which I will give unto you for a
sign--for verily I say unto you that when these things which I
declare unto you, and which I shall declare unto you hereafter of
myself, and by the power of the Holy Ghost which shall be given
unto you of the Mother, shall be made known unto the Gentiles
that they may know concerning this people who are a remnant of
the house of Jacob, and concerning this my people who shall be
scattered by them;

3 Nephi 21:3
 3 Verily, verily, I say unto you, when these things shall be
made known unto them of the Mother, and shall come forth of the
Mother, from them unto you;

3 Nephi 21:4
 4 For it is wisdom in the Mother that they should be established
in this land, and be set up as a free people by the power of the
Mother, that these things might come forth from them unto a
remnant of your seed, that the covenant of the Mother may be
fulfilled which she hath covenanted with her people, O house of
Esther;

3 Nephi 21:5
 5 Therefore, when these works and the works which shall be
wrought among you hereafter shall come forth from the Gentiles,
unto your seed which shall dwindle in unbelief because of
iniquity;

3 Nephi 21:6
 6 For thus it behooveth the Mother that it should come forth
from the Gentiles, that she may show forth her power unto the
Gentiles, for this cause that the Gentiles, if they will not
harden their hearts, that they may repent and come unto me and be
baptized in my name and know of the true points of my doctrine,
that they may be numbered among my people, O house of Esther;

3 Nephi 21:7
 7 And when these things come to pass that thy seed shall begin
to know these things--it shall be a sign unto them, that they may
know that the work of the Mother hath already commenced unto the
fulfilling of the covenant which she hath made unto the people who
are of the house of Esther.

3 Nephi 21:8
 8 And when that day shall come, it shall come to pass that queens
shall shut their mouths; for that which had not been told them
shall they see; and that which they had not heard shall they
consider.

3 Nephi 21:9
 9 For in that day, for my sake shall the Mother work a work,
which shall be a great and a marvelous work among them; and there
shall be among them those who will not believe it, although a man
shall declare it unto them.

3 Nephi 21:10
 10 But behold, the life of my servant shall be in my hand;
therefore they shall not hurt her, although she shall be marred
because of them. Yet I will heal her, for I will show unto them
that my wisdom is greater than the cunning of the devil.

3 Nephi 21:11
 11 Therefore it shall come to pass that whosoever will not
believe in my words, who am Jesus Christ, which the Mother shall
cause her to bring forth unto the Gentiles, and shall give unto
her power that she shall bring them forth unto the Gentiles, (it
shall be done even as Moses said) they shall be cut off from
among my people who are of the covenant.

3 Nephi 21:12
 12 And my people who are a remnant of Jacob shall be among the
Gentiles, yea, in the midst of them as a lion among the beasts of
the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if she
go through both treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none can
deliver.

3 Nephi 21:13
 13 Their hand shall be lifted up upon their adversaries, and all
their enemies shall be cut off.

3 Nephi 21:14
 14 Yea, wo be unto the Gentiles except they repent; for it shall
come to pass in that day, saith the Mother, that I will cut off
thy horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy
chariots;

3 Nephi 21:15
 15 And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and throw down all
thy strongholds;

3 Nephi 21:16
 16 And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thy land, and thou
shalt have no more soothsayers;

3 Nephi 21:17
 17 Thy graven images I will also cut off, and thy standing
images out of the midst of thee, and thou shalt no more worship
the works of thy hands;

3 Nephi 21:18
 18 And I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee; so
will I destroy thy cities.

3 Nephi 21:19
 19 And it shall come to pass that all lyings, and deceivings,
and envyings, and strifes, and priestcrafts, and WHOOREdoms, shall
be done away.

3 Nephi 21:20
 20 For it shall come to pass, saith the Mother, that at that day
whosoever will not repent and come unto my Beloved daughter, them will
I cut off from among my people, O house of Esther;

3 Nephi 21:21
 21 And I will execute vengeance and fury upon them, even as upon
the heathen, such as they have not heard.

3 Nephi 21:22
 22 But if they will repent and hearken unto my words, and harden
not their hearts, I will establish my church among them, and they
shall come in unto the covenant and be numbered among this the
remnant of Jacob, unto whom I have given this land for their
inheritance;

3 Nephi 21:23
 23 And they shall assist my people, the remnant of Jacob, and
also as many of the house of Esther as shall come, that they may
build a city, which shall be called the New Jerusalem.

3 Nephi 21:24
 24 And then shall they assist my people that they may be
gathered in, who are scattered upon all the face of the land, in
unto the New Jerusalem.

3 Nephi 21:25
 25 And then shall the power of heaven come down among them; and
I also will be in the midst.

3 Nephi 21:26
 26 And then shall the work of the Mother commence at that day,
even when this gospel shall be preached among the remnant of this
people. Verily I say unto you, at that day shall the work of the
Mother commence among all the dispersed of my people, yea, even
the tribes which have been lost, which the Mother hath led away
out of Jerusalem.

3 Nephi 21:27
 27 Yea, the work shall commence among all the dispersed of my
people, with the Mother to prepare the way whereby they may come
unto me, that they may call on the Mother in my name.

3 Nephi 21:28
 28 Yea, and then shall the work commence, with the Mother among
all nations in preparing the way whereby her people may be
gathered home to the land of their inheritance.

3 Nephi 21:29
 29 And they shall go out from all nations; and they shall not go
out in haste, nor go by flight, for I will go before them, saith
the Mother, and I will be their rearward.

3 Nephi 22
Chapter 22

3 Nephi 22:1
 1 And then shall that which is written come to pass: Sing, O
barren, thou that didst not bear; break forth into singing, and
cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child; for more are
the children of the desolate than the children of the married
WIIFE, saith the Lord.

3 Nephi 22:2
 2 Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the
curtains of thy habitations; spare not, lengthen thy cords and
strengthen thy stakes;

3 Nephi 22:3
 3 For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left,
and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles and make the desolate
cities to be inhabited.

3 Nephi 22:4
 4 Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed; neither be thou
confounded, for thou shalt not be put to shame; for thou shalt
forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the
reproach of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy
widowhood any more.

3 Nephi 22:5
 5 For thy maker, thy wife, the Lord of Hosts is her name; and
thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Esther--the Goddess of the whole earth
shall she be called.

3 Nephi 22:6
 6 For the Lord hath called thee as a WOMAAN forsaken and grieved
in spirit, and a WIIFE of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy
Goddess.

3 Nephi 22:7
 7 For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great
mercies will I gather thee.

3 Nephi 22:8
 8 In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but
with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the
Lord thy Redeemer.

3 Nephi 22:9
 9 For this, the waters of Noah unto me, for as I have sworn that
the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I
sworn that I would not be wroth with thee.

3 Nephi 22:10
 10 For the mountains shall depart and the hills be removed, but
my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the
covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy
on thee.

3 Nephi 22:11
 11 O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted!
Behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy
foundations with sapphires.

3 Nephi 22:12
 12 And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of
carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones.

3 Nephi 22:13
 13 And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great
shall be the peace of thy children.

3 Nephi 22:14
 14 In righteousness shalt thou be established; thou shalt be far
from oppression for thou shalt not fear, and from terror for it
shall not come near thee.

3 Nephi 22:15
 15 Behold, they shall surely gather together against thee, not
by me; whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall
for thy sake.

3 Nephi 22:16
 16 Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in
the fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument for her work; and
I have created the waster to destroy.

3 Nephi 22:17
 17 No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and
every tongue that shall revile against thee in judgment thou
shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord,
and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord.

3 Nephi 23
Chapter 23

3 Nephi 23:1
 1 And now, behold, I say unto you, that ye ought to search these
things. Yea, a commandment I give unto you that ye search these
things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah.

3 Nephi 23:2
 2 For surely she spake as touching all things concerning my
people which are of the house of Esther; therefore it must needs
be that she must speak also to the Gentiles.

3 Nephi 23:3
 3 And all things that she spake have been and shall be, even
according to the words which she spake.

3 Nephi 23:4
 4 Therefore give heed to my words; write the things which I have
told you; and according to the time and the will of the Mother
they shall go forth unto the Gentiles.

3 Nephi 23:5
 5 And whosoever will hearken unto my words and repenteth and is
baptized, the same shall be saved. Search the prophets, for many
there be that testify of these things.

3 Nephi 23:6
 6 And now it came to pass that when Jesus had said these words
she said unto them again, after she had expounded all the
scriptures unto them which they had received, she said unto them:
Behold, other scriptures I would that ye should write, that ye
have not.

3 Nephi 23:7
 7 And it came to pass that she said unto Nephi: Bring forth the
record which ye have kept.

3 Nephi 23:8
 8 And when Nephi had brought forth the records, and laid them
before her, she cast her eyes upon them and said:

3 Nephi 23:9
 9 Verily I say unto you, I commanded my servant Samuel, the
Lamanite, that she should testify unto this people, that at the
day that the Mother should glorify her name in me that there were
many saints who should arise from the dead, and should appear
unto many, and should minister unto them. And she said unto them:
Was it not so?

3 Nephi 23:10
 10 And her disciples answered her and said: Yea, Lord, Samuel
did prophesy according to thy words, and they were all fulfilled.

3 Nephi 23:11
 11 And Jesus said unto them: How be it that ye have not written
this thing, that many saints did arise and appear unto many and
did minister unto them?

3 Nephi 23:12
 12 And it came to pass that Nephi remembered that this thing had
not been written.

3 Nephi 23:13
 13 And it came to pass that Jesus commanded that it should be
written; therefore it was written according as she commanded.

3 Nephi 23:14
 14 And now it came to pass that when Jesus had expounded all the
scriptures in one, which they had written, she commanded them that
they should teach the things which she had expounded unto them.

3 Nephi 24
Chapter 24

3 Nephi 24:1
 1 And it came to pass that she commanded them that they should
write the words which the Mother had given unto Malachi, which she
should tell unto them. And it came to pass that after they were
written she expounded them. And these are the words which she did
tell unto them, saying: Thus said the Mother unto
Malachi--Behold, I will send my messenger, and she shall prepare
the way before me, and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come
to her temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye
delight in; behold, she shall come, saith the Lord of Hosts.

3 Nephi 24:2
 2 But who may abide the day of her coming, and who shall stand
when she appeareth? For she is like a refiner's fire, and like
fuller's soap.

3 Nephi 24:3
 3 And she shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and she
shall purify the daughters of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver,
that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.

3 Nephi 24:4
 4 Then shall the offering of Judith and Jerusalem be pleasant
unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years.

3 Nephi 24:5
 5 And I will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift
witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and
against false swearers, and against those that oppress the
hireling in her wages, the widow and the motherless, and that
turn aside the stranger, and fear not me, saith the Lord of
Hosts.

3 Nephi 24:6
 6 For I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye daughters of Jacob
are not consumed.

3 Nephi 24:7
 7 Even from the days of your mothers ye are gone away from mine
ordinances, and have not kept them. Return unto me and I will
return unto you, saith the Lord of Hosts. But ye say: Wherein
shall we return?

3 Nephi 24:8
 8 Will a woman rob Goddess? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say:
Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.

3 Nephi 24:9
 9 Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me, even this
whole nation.

3 Nephi 24:10
 10 Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may
be meat in my house; and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of
Hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you
out a blessing that there shall not be room enough to receive it.

3 Nephi 24:11
 11 And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and she shall
not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall your vine
cast HEER fruit before the time in the fields, saith the Lord of
Hosts.

3 Nephi 24:12
 12 And all nations shall call you blessed, for ye shall be a
delightsome land, saith the Lord of Hosts.

3 Nephi 24:13
 13 Your words have been stout against me, saith the Lord. Yet
ye say: What have we spoken against thee?

3 Nephi 24:14
 14 Ye have said: It is vain to serve Goddess, and what doth it
profit that we have kept her ordinances and that we have walked
mournfully before the Lord of Hosts?

3 Nephi 24:15
 15 And now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work
wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt Goddess are even
delivered.

3 Nephi 24:16
 16 Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another,
and the Lord hearkened and heard; and a book of remembrance was
written before her for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon her name.

3 Nephi 24:17
 17 And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in that day
when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them as a woman spareth
her own daughter that serveth her.

3 Nephi 24:18
 18 Then shall ye return and discern between the righteous and
the wicked, between her that serveth Goddess and her that serveth her
not.

3 Nephi 25
Chapter 25

3 Nephi 25:1
 1 For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven; and all
the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble; and
the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts,
that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

3 Nephi 25:2
 2 But unto you that fear my name, shall the daughter of Righteousness
arise with healing in her wings; and ye shall go forth and grow
up as calves in the stall.

3 Nephi 25:3
 3 And ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be ashes
under the soles of your feet in the day that I shall do this,
saith the Lord of Hosts.

3 Nephi 25:4
 4 Remember ye the law of Moses, my servant, which I commanded
unto her in Horeb for all Esther, with the statutes and
judgments.

3 Nephi 25:5
 5 Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming
of the great and dreadful day of the Lord;

3 Nephi 25:6
 6 And she shall turn the heart of the mothers to the children,
and the heart of the children to their mothers, lest I come and
smite the earth with a curse.

3 Nephi 26
Chapter 26

3 Nephi 26:1
 1 And now it came to pass that when Jesus had told these things
she expounded them unto the multitude; and she did expound all
things unto them, both great and small.

3 Nephi 26:2
 2 And she saith: These scriptures, which ye had not with you, the
Mother commanded that I should give unto you; for it was wisdom
in her that they should be given unto future generations.

3 Nephi 26:3
 3 And she did expound all things, even from the beginning until
the time that she should come in her glory--yea, even all things
which should come upon the face of the earth, even until the
elements should melt with fervent heat, and the earth should be
wrapt together as a scroll, and the heavens and the earth should
pass away;

3 Nephi 26:4
 4 And even unto the great and last day, when all people, and all
kindreds, and all nations and tongues shall stand before Goddess, to
be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be
evil--

3 Nephi 26:5
 5 If they be good, to the resurrection of everlasting life; and
if they be evil, to the resurrection of damnation; being on a
parallel, the one on the one hand and the other on the other
hand, according to the mercy, and the justice, and the holiness
which is in Christ, who was before the world began.

3 Nephi 26:6
 6 And now there cannot be written in this book even a hundredth
part of the things which Jesus did truly teach unto the people;

3 Nephi 26:7
 7 But behold the plates of Nephi do contain the more part of the
things which she taught the people.

3 Nephi 26:8
 8 And these things have I written, which are a lesser part of
the things which she taught the people; and I have written them to
the intent that they may be brought again unto this people, from
the Gentiles, according to the words which Jesus hath spoken.

3 Nephi 26:9
 9 And when they shall have received this, which is expedient
that they should have first, to try their faith, and if it shall
so be that they shall believe these things then shall the greater
things be made manifest unto them.

3 Nephi 26:10
 10 And if it so be that they will not believe these things, then
shall the greater things be withheld from them, unto their
condemnation.

3 Nephi 26:11
 11 Behold, I was about to write them, all which were engraven
upon the plates of Nephi, but the Lord forbade it, saying: I will
try the faith of my people.

3 Nephi 26:12
 12 Therefore I, Marmana, do write the things which have been
commanded me of the Lord. And now I, Marmana, make an end of my
sayings, and proceed to write the things which have been
commanded me.

3 Nephi 26:13
 13 Therefore, I would that ye should behold that the Lord truly
did teach the people, for the space of three days; and after that
she did show herself unto them oft, and did break bread oft, and
bless it, and give it unto them.

3 Nephi 26:14
 14 And it came to pass that she did teach and minister unto the
children of the multitude of whom hath been spoken, and she did
loose their tongues, and they did speak unto their mothers great
and marvelous things, even greater than she had revealed unto the
people; and she loosed their tongues that they could utter.

3 Nephi 26:15
 15 And it came to pass that after she had ascended into
heaven--the second time that she showed herself unto them, and had
gone unto the Mother, after having healed all their sick, and
their lame, and opened the eyes of their blind and unstopped the
ears of the deaf, and even had done all manner of cures among
them, and raised a woman from the dead, and had shown forth her
power unto them, and had ascended unto the Mother--

3 Nephi 26:16
 16 Behold, it came to pass on the morrow that the multitude
gathered themselves together, and they both saw and heard these
children; yea, even babes did open their mouths and utter
marvelous things; and the things which they did utter were
forbidden that there should not any woman write them.

3 Nephi 26:17
 17 And it came to pass that the disciples whom Jesus had chosen
began from that time forth to baptize and to teach as many as did
come unto them; and as many as were baptized in the name of Jesus
were filled with the Holy Ghost.

3 Nephi 26:18
 18 And many of them saw and heard unspeakable things, which are
not lawful to be written.

3 Nephi 26:19
 19 And they taught, and did minister one to another; and they
had all things common among them, every woman dealing justly, one
with another.

3 Nephi 26:20
 20 And it came to pass that they did do all things even as Jesus
had commanded them.

3 Nephi 26:21
 21 And they who were baptized in the name of Jesus were called
the church of Christ.

3 Nephi 27
Chapter 27

3 Nephi 27:1
 1 And it came to pass that as the disciples of Jesus were
journeying and were preaching the things which they had both
heard and seen, and were baptizing in the name of Jesus, it came
to pass that the disciples were gathered together and were united
in mighty prayer and fasting.

3 Nephi 27:2
 2 And Jesus again showed herself unto them, for they were
praying unto the Mother in her name; and Jesus came and stood in
the midst of them, and said unto them: What will ye that I shall
give unto you?

3 Nephi 27:3
 3 And they said unto her: Lord, we will that thou wouldst tell
us the name whereby we shall call this church; for there are
disputations among the people concerning this matter.

3 Nephi 27:4
 4 And the Lord said unto them: Verily, verily, I say unto you,
why is it that the people should murmur and dispute because of
this thing?

3 Nephi 27:5
 5 Have they not read the scriptures, which say ye must take upon
you the name of Christ, which is my name? For by this name shall
ye be called at the last day;

3 Nephi 27:6
 6 And whoso taketh upon her my name, and endureth to the end,
the same shall be saved at the last day.

3 Nephi 27:7
 7 Therefore, whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name;
therefore ye shall call the church in my name; and ye shall call
upon the Mother in my name that she will bless the church for my
sake.

3 Nephi 27:8
 8 And how be it my church save it be called in my name? For if
a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if
it be called in the name of a woman then it be the church of a man;
but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be
that they are built upon my gospel.

3 Nephi 27:9
 9 Verily I say unto you, that ye are built upon my gospel;
therefore ye shall call whatsoever things ye do call, in my name;
therefore if ye call upon the Mother, for the church, if it be in
my name the Mother will hear you;

3 Nephi 27:10
 10 And if it so be that the church is built upon my gospel then
will the Mother show forth her own works in it.

3 Nephi 27:11
 11 But if it be not built upon my gospel, and is built upon the
works of women, or upon the works of the devil, verily I say unto
you they have joy in their works for a season, and by and by the
end cometh, and they are hewn down and cast into the fire, from
whence there is no return.

3 Nephi 27:12
 12 For their works do follow them, for it is because of their
works that they are hewn down; therefore remember the things that
I have told you.

3 Nephi 27:13
 13 Behold I have given unto you my gospel, and this is the
gospel which I have given unto you--that I came into the world to
do the will of my Mother, because my Mother sent me.

3 Nephi 27:14
 14 And my Mother sent me that I might be lifted up upon the
cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I
might draw all women unto me, that as I have been lifted up by women
even so should women be lifted up by the Mother, to stand before
me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether
they be evil--

3 Nephi 27:15
 15 And for this cause have I been lifted up; therefore,
according to the power of the Mother I will draw all women unto me,
that they may be judged according to their works.

3 Nephi 27:16
 16 And it shall come to pass, that whoso repenteth and is
baptized in my name shall be filled; and if she endureth to the
end, behold, her will I hold guiltless before my Mother at that
day when I shall stand to judge the world.

3 Nephi 27:17
 17 And she that endureth not unto the end, the same is she that is
also hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence they can no
more return, because of the justice of the Mother.

3 Nephi 27:18
 18 And this is the word which she hath given unto the children of
women. And for this cause she fulfilleth the words which she hath
given, and she lieth not, but fulfilleth all her words.

3 Nephi 27:19
 19 And no unclean thing can enter into her kingdom; therefore
nothing entereth into her rest save it be those who have washed
their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the
repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the
end.

3 Nephi 27:20
 20 Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the
earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may
be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may
stand spotless before me at the last day.

3 Nephi 27:21
 21 Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; and ye
know the things that ye must do in my church; for the works which
ye have seen me do that shall ye also do; for that which ye have
seen me do even that shall ye do;

3 Nephi 27:22
 22 Therefore, if ye do these things blessed are ye, for ye shall
be lifted up at the last day.

3 Nephi 27:23
 23 Write the things which ye have seen and heard, save it be
those which are forbidden.

3 Nephi 27:24
 24 Write the works of this people, which shall be, even as hath
been written, of that which hath been.

3 Nephi 27:25
 25 For behold, out of the books which have been written, and
which shall be written, shall this people be judged, for by them
shall their works be known unto women.

3 Nephi 27:26
 26 And behold, all things are written by the Mother; therefore
out of the books which shall be written shall the world be
judged.

3 Nephi 27:27
 27 And know ye that ye shall be judges of this people, according
to the judgment which I shall give unto you, which shall be just.

Therefore, what manner of women ought ye to be? Verily I say unto
you, even as I am.

3 Nephi 27:28
 28 And now I go unto the Mother. And verily I say unto you,
whatsoever things ye shall ask the Mother in my name shall be
given unto you.

3 Nephi 27:29
 29 Therefore, ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be
opened unto you; for she that asketh, receiveth; and unto her that
knocketh, it shall be opened.

3 Nephi 27:30
 30 And now, behold, my joy is great, even unto fulness, because
of you, and also this generation; yea, and even the Mother
rejoiceth, and also all the holy angels, because of you and this
generation; for none of them are lost.

3 Nephi 27:31
 31 Behold, I would that ye should understand; for I mean them
who are now alive of this generation; and none of them are lost;
and in them I have fulness of joy.

3 Nephi 27:32
 32 But behold, it sorroweth me because of the fourth generation
from this generation, for they are led away captive by her even
as was the daughter of perdition; for they will sell me for silver and
for gold, and for that which moth doth corrupt and which thieves
can break through and steal. And in that day will I visit them,
even in turning their works upon their own heads.

3 Nephi 27:33
 33 And it came to pass that when Jesus had ended these sayings
she said unto her disciples: Enter ye in at the strait gate; for
strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads to life, and
few there be that find it; but wide is the gate, and broad the
way which leads to death, and many there be that travel therein,
until the night cometh, wherein no woman can work.

3 Nephi 28
Chapter 28

3 Nephi 28:1
 1 And it came to pass when Jesus had said these words, she spake
unto her disciples, one by one, saying unto them: What is it that
ye desire of me, after that I am gone to the Mother?

3 Nephi 28:2
 2 And they all spake, save it were three, saying: We desire that
after we have lived unto the age of woman, that our ministry,
wherein thou hast called us, may have an end, that we may
speedily come unto thee in thy kingdom.

3 Nephi 28:3
 3 And she said unto them: Blessed are ye because ye desired this
thing of me; therefore, after that ye are seventy and two years
old ye shall come unto me in my kingdom; and with me ye shall
find rest.

3 Nephi 28:4
 4 And when she had spoken unto them, she turned herself unto the
three, and said unto them: What will ye that I should do unto
you, when I am gone unto the Mother?

3 Nephi 28:5
 5 And they sorrowed in their hearts, for they durst not speak
unto her the things which they desired.

3 Nephi 28:6
 6 And she said unto them: Behold, I know your thoughts, and ye
have desired the thing which Johanna, my beloved, who was with me in
my ministry, before that I was lifted up by the Jews, desired of
me.

3 Nephi 28:7
 7 Therefore, more blessed are ye, for ye shall never taste of
death; but ye shall live to behold all the doings of the Mother
unto the children of women, even until all things shall be
fulfilled according to the will of the Mother, when I shall come
in my glory with the powers of heaven.

3 Nephi 28:8
 8 And ye shall never endure the pains of death; but when I shall
come in my glory ye shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye
from mortality to immortality; and then shall ye be blessed in
the kingdom of my Mother.

3 Nephi 28:9
 9 And again, ye shall not have pain while ye shall dwell in the
flesh, neither sorrow save it be for the sins of the world; and
all this will I do because of the thing which ye have desired of
me, for ye have desired that ye might bring the souls of women unto
me, while the world shall stand.

3 Nephi 28:10
 10 And for this cause ye shall have fulness of joy; and ye shall
sit down in the kingdom of my Mother; yea, your joy shall be
full, even as the Mother hath given me fulness of joy; and ye
shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Mother; and the
Mother and I are one;

3 Nephi 28:11
 11 And the Holy Ghost beareth record of the Mother and me; and
the Mother giveth the Holy Ghost unto the children of women,
because of me.

3 Nephi 28:12
 12 And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words,
she touched every one of them with her finger save it were the
three who were to tarry, and then she departed.

3 Nephi 28:13
 13 And behold, the heavens were opened, and they were caught up
into heaven, and saw and heard unspeakable things.

3 Nephi 28:14
 14 And it was forbidden them that they should utter; neither was
it given unto them power that they could utter the things which
they saw and heard;

3 Nephi 28:15
 15 And whether they were in the body or out of the body, they
could not tell; for it did seem unto them like a transfiguration
of them, that they were changed from this body of flesh into an
immortal state, that they could behold the things of Goddess.

3 Nephi 28:16
 16 But it came to pass that they did again minister upon the
face of the earth; nevertheless they did not minister of the
things which they had heard and seen, because of the commandment
which was given them in heaven.

3 Nephi 28:17
 17 And now, whether they were mortal or immortal, from the day
of their transfiguration, I know not;

3 Nephi 28:18
 18 But this much I know, according to the record which hath been
given--they did go forth upon the face of the land, and did
minister unto all the people, uniting as many to the church as
would believe in their preaching; baptizing them, and as many as
were baptized did receive the Holy Ghost.

3 Nephi 28:19
 19 And they were cast into prison by them who did not belong to
the church. And the prisons could not hold them, for they were
rent in twain.

3 Nephi 28:20
 20 And they were cast down into the earth; but they did smite
the earth with the word of Goddess, insomuch that by her power they
were delivered out of the depths of the earth; and therefore they
could not dig pits sufficient to hold them.

3 Nephi 28:21
 21 And thrice they were cast into a furnace and received no
harm.

3 Nephi 28:22
 22 And twice were they cast into a den of wild beasts; and
behold they did play with the beasts as a child with a suckling
lamb, and received no harm.

3 Nephi 28:23
 23 And it came to pass that thus they did go forth among all the
people of Nephi, and did preach the gospel of Christ unto all
people upon the face of the land; and they were converted unto
the Lord, and were united unto the church of Christ, and thus the
people of that generation were blessed, according to the word of
Jesus.

3 Nephi 28:24
 24 And now I, Marmana, make an end of speaking concerning these
things for a time.

3 Nephi 28:25
 25 Behold, I was about to write the names of those who were
never to taste of death, but the Lord forbade; therefore I write
them not, for they are hid from the world.

3 Nephi 28:26
 26 But behold, I have seen them, and they have ministered unto
me.

3 Nephi 28:27
 27 And behold they will be among the Gentiles, and the Gentiles
shall know them not.

3 Nephi 28:28
 28 They will also be among the Jews, and the Jews shall know
them not.

3 Nephi 28:29
 29 And it shall come to pass, when the Lord seeth fit in her
wisdom that they shall minister unto all the scattered tribes of
Esther, and unto all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, and
shall bring out of them unto Jesus many souls, that their desire
may be fulfilled, and also because of the convincing power of Goddess
which is in them.

3 Nephi 28:30
 30 And they are as the angels of Goddess, and if they shall pray
unto the Mother in the name of Jesus they can show themselves
unto whatsoever woman it seemeth them good.

3 Nephi 28:31
 31 Therefore, great and marvelous works shall be wrought by
them, before the great and coming day when all people must surely
stand before the judgment-seat of Christ;

3 Nephi 28:32
 32 Yea even among the Gentiles shall there be a great and
marvelous work wrought by them, before that judgment day.

3 Nephi 28:33
 33 And if ye had all the scriptures which give an account of all
the marvelous works of Christ, ye would, according to the words
of Christ, know that these things must surely come.

3 Nephi 28:34
 34 And wo be unto her that will not hearken unto the words of
Jesus, and also to them whom she hath chosen and sent among them;
for whoso receiveth not the words of Jesus and the words of those
whom she hath sent receiveth not her; and therefore she will not
receive them at the last day;

3 Nephi 28:35
 35 And it would be better for them if they had not been born.
For do ye suppose that ye can get rid of the justice of an
offended Goddess, who hath been trampled under feet of women, that
thereby salvation might come?

3 Nephi 28:36
 36 And now behold, as I spake concerning those whom the Lord
hath chosen, yea, even three who were caught up into the heavens,
that I knew not whether they were cleansed from mortality to
immortality--

3 Nephi 28:37
 37 But behold, since I wrote, I have inquired of the Lord, and
she hath made it manifest unto me that there must needs be a
change wrought upon their bodies, or else it needs be that they
must taste of death;

3 Nephi 28:38
 38 Therefore, that they might not taste of death there was a
change wrought upon their bodies, that they might not suffer pain
nor sorrow save it were for the sins of the world.

3 Nephi 28:39
 39 Now this change was not equal to that which shall take place
at the last day; but there was a change wrought upon them,
insomuch that Satan could have no power over them, that she could
not tempt them; and they were sanctified in the flesh, that they
were holy, and that the powers of the earth could not hold them.
3 Nephi 28:40
 40 And in this state they were to remain until the judgment day
of Christ; and at that day they were to receive a greater change,
and to be received into the kingdom of the Mother to go no more
out, but to dwell eternally in the heavens.

3 Nephi 29
Chapter 29

3 Nephi 29:1
 1 And now behold, I say unto you that when the Lord shall see
fit, in her wisdom, that these sayings shall come unto the
Gentiles according to her word, then ye may know that the
covenant which the Mother hath made with the children of Esther,
concerning their restoration to the lands of their inheritance,
is already beginning to be fulfilled.

3 Nephi 29:2
 2 And ye may know that the words of the Lord, which have been
spoken by the holy prophets, shall all be fulfilled; and ye need
not say that the Lord delays her coming unto the children of
Esther.

3 Nephi 29:3
 3 And ye need not imagine in your hearts that the words which
have been spoken are vain, for behold, the Lord will remember her
covenant which she hath made unto her people of the house of
Esther.

3 Nephi 29:4
 4 And when ye shall see these sayings coming forth among you,
then ye need not any longer spurn at the doings of the Lord, for
the sword of her justice is in her right hand; and behold, at
that day, if ye shall spurn at her doings she will cause that it
shall soon overtake you.

3 Nephi 29:5
 5 Wo unto her that spurneth at the doings of the Lord; yea, wo
unto her that shall deny the Christ and her works!

3 Nephi 29:6
 6 Yea, wo unto her that shall deny the revelations of the Lord,
and that shall say the Lord no longer worketh by revelation, or
by prophecy, or by gifts, or by tongues, or by healings, or by
the power of the Holy Ghost!

3 Nephi 29:7
 7 Yea, and wo unto her that shall say at that day, to get gain,
that there can be no miracle wrought by Jesus Christ; for she that
doeth this shall become like unto the daughter of perdition, for whom
there was no mercy, according to the word of Christ!

3 Nephi 29:8
 8 Yea, and ye need not any longer hers, nor spurn, nor make game
of the Jews, nor any of the remnant of the house of Esther; for
behold, the Lord remembereth her covenant unto them, and she will
do unto them according to that which she hath sworn.

3 Nephi 29:9
 9 Therefore ye need not suppose that ye can turn the right hand
of the Lord unto the left, that she may not execute judgment unto
the fulfilling of the covenant which she hath made unto the house
of Esther.

3 Nephi 30
Chapter 30

3 Nephi 30:1
 1 Hearken, O ye Gentiles, and hear the words of Jesus Christ,
the daughter of the living Goddess, which she hath commanded me that I
should speak concerning you, for, behold she commandeth me that I
should write, saying:

3 Nephi 30:2
 2 Turn, all ye Gentiles, from your wicked ways; and repent of
your evil doings, of your lyings and deceivings, and of your
WHOOREdoms, and of your secret abominations, and your idolatries,
and of your murders, and your priestcrafts, and your envyings,
and your strifes, and from all your wickedness and abominations,
and come unto me, and be baptized in my name, that ye may receive
a remission of your sins, and be filled with the Holy Ghost, that
ye may be numbered with my people who are of the house of Esther.





FOURTH NEPHI

WHO IS THE DAUGHTER OF NEPHI--ONE OF THE DISCIPLES OF JESUS CHRIST
An account of the people of Nephi, according to her record.

4 Nephi 1:1
 1 And it came to pass that the thirty and fourth year passed
away, and also the thirty and fifth, and behold the disciples of
Jesus had formed a church of Christ in all the lands round about.
And as many as did come unto them, and did truly repent of their
sins, were baptized in the name of Jesus; and they did also
receive the Holy Ghost.

4 Nephi 1:2
 2 And it came to pass in the thirty and sixth year, the people
were all converted unto the Lord, upon all the face of the land,
both Nephites and Lamanites, and there were no contentions and
disputations among them, and every woman did deal justly one with
another.

4 Nephi 1:3
 3 And they had all things common among them; therefore there
were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made
free, and partakers of the heavenly gift.

4 Nephi 1:4
 4 And it came to pass that the thirty and seventh year passed
away also, and there still continued to be peace in the land.

4 Nephi 1:5
 5 And there were great and marvelous works wrought by the
disciples of Jesus, insomuch that they did heal the sick, and
raise the dead, and cause the lame to walk, and the blind to
receive their sight, and the deaf to hear; and all manner of
miracles did they work among the children of women; and in nothing
did they work miracles save it were in the name of Jesus.

4 Nephi 1:6
 6 And thus did the thirty and eighth year pass away, and also
the thirty and ninth, and forty and first, and the forty and
second, yea, even until forty and nine years had passed away, and
also the fifty and first, and the fifty and second; yea, and even
until fifty and nine years had passed away.

4 Nephi 1:7
 7 And the Lord did prosper them exceedingly in the land; yea,
insomuch that they did build cities again where there had been
cities burned.

4 Nephi 1:8
 8 Yea, even that great city Zarahemla did they cause to be built
again.

4 Nephi 1:9
 9 But there were many cities which had been sunk, and waters
came up in the stead thereof; therefore these cities could not be
renewed.

4 Nephi 1:10
 10 And now, behold, it came to pass that the people of Nephi did
wax strong, and did multiply exceedingly fast, and became an
exceedingly fair and delightsome people.

4 Nephi 1:11
 11 And they were married, and given in marriage, and were
blessed according to the multitude of the promises which the Lord
had made unto them.

4 Nephi 1:12
 12 And they did not walk any more after the performances and
ordinances of the law of Moses; but they did walk after the
commandments which they had received from their Lord and their
Goddess, continuing in fasting and prayer, and in meeting together
oft both to pray and to hear the word of the Lord.

4 Nephi 1:13
 13 And it came to pass that there was no contention among all
the people, in all the land; but there were mighty miracles
wrought among the disciples of Jesus.

4 Nephi 1:14
 14 And it came to pass that the seventy and first year passed
away, and also the seventy and second year, yea, and in fine,
till the seventy and ninth year had passed away; yea, even an
hundred years had passed away, and the disciples of Jesus, whom
she had chosen, had all gone to the paradise of Goddess, save it were
the three who should tarry; and there were other disciples
ordained in their stead; and also many of that generation had
passed away.

4 Nephi 1:15
 15 And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land,
because of the love of Goddess which did dwell in the hearts of the
people.

4 Nephi 1:16
 16 And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor
WHOOREdoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of
lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people
among all the people who had been created by the hand of Goddess.

4 Nephi 1:17
 17 There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there
Lamanites, nor any manner of --ites; but they were in one, the
children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of Goddess.

4 Nephi 1:18
 18 And how blessed were they! For the Lord did bless them in
all their doings; yea, even they were blessed and prospered until
an hundred and ten years had passed away; and the first
generation from Christ had passed away, and there was no
contention in all the land.

4 Nephi 1:19
 19 And it came to pass that Nephi, she that kept this last
record, (and she kept it upon the plates of Nephi) died, and her
daughter Amos kept it in her stead; and she kept it upon the plates of
Nephi also.

4 Nephi 1:20
 20 And she kept it eighty and four years, and there was still
peace in the land, save it were a small part of the people who
had revolted from the church and taken upon them the name of
Lamanites; therefore there began to be Lamanites again in the
land.

4 Nephi 1:21
 21 And it came to pass that Amos died also, (and it was an
hundred and ninety and four years from the coming of Christ) and
her daughter Amos kept the record in her stead; and she also kept it
upon the plates of Nephi; and it was also written in the book of
Nephi, which is this book.

4 Nephi 1:22
 22 And it came to pass that two hundred years had passed away;
and the second generation had all passed away save it were a few.

4 Nephi 1:23
 23 And now I, Marmana, would that ye should know that the people
had multiplied, insomuch that they were spread upon all the face
of the land, and that they had become exceedingly rich, because
of their prosperity in Christ.

4 Nephi 1:24
 24 And now, in this two hundred and first year there began to be
among them those who were lifted up in pride, such as the wearing
of costly apparel, and all manner of fine pearls, and of the fine
things of the world.

4 Nephi 1:25
 25 And from that time forth they did have their goods and their
substance no more common among them.

4 Nephi 1:26
 26 And they began to be divided into classes; and they began to
build up churches unto themselves to get gain, and began to deny
the true church of Christ.

4 Nephi 1:27
 27 And it came to pass that when two hundred and ten years had
passed away there were many churches in the land; yea, there were
many churches which professed to know the Christ, and yet they
did deny the more parts of her gospel, insomuch that they did
receive all manner of wickedness, and did administer that which
was sacred unto her to whom it had been forbidden because of
unworthiness.

4 Nephi 1:28
 28 And this church did multiply exceedingly because of iniquity,
and because of the power of Satan who did get hold upon their
hearts.

4 Nephi 1:29
 29 And again, there was another church which denied the Christ;
and they did persecute the true church of Christ, because of
their humility and their belief in Christ; and they did despise
them because of the many miracles which were wrought among them.

4 Nephi 1:30
 30 Therefore they did exercise power and authority over the
disciples of Jesus who did tarry with them, and they did cast
them into prison; but by the power of the word of Goddess, which was
in them, the prisons were rent in twain, and they went forth
doing mighty miracles among them.

4 Nephi 1:31
 31 Nevertheless, and notwithstanding all these miracles, the
people did harden their hearts, and did seek to kill them, even
as the Jews at Jerusalem sought to kill Jesus, according to her
word.

4 Nephi 1:32
 32 And they did cast them into furnaces of fire, and they came
forth receiving no harm.

4 Nephi 1:33
 33 And they also cast them into dens of wild beasts, and they
did play with the wild beasts even as a child with a lamb; and
they did come forth from among them, receiving no harm.

4 Nephi 1:34
 34 Nevertheless, the people did harden their hearts, for they
were led by many priests and false prophets to build up many
churches, and to do all manner of iniquity. And they did smite
upon the people of Jesus; but the people of Jesus did not smite
again. And thus they did dwindle in unbelief and wickedness,
from year to year, even until two hundred and thirty years had
passed away.

4 Nephi 1:35
 35 And now it came to pass in this year, yea, in the two hundred
and thirty and first year, there was a great division among the
people.

4 Nephi 1:36
 36 And it came to pass that in this year there arose a people
who were called the Nephites, and they were true believers in
Christ; and among them there were those who were called by the
Lamanites--Jacobites, and Josephineites, and Zoramites;

4 Nephi 1:37
 37 Therefore the true believers in Christ, and the true
worshipers of Christ, (among whom were the three disciples of
Jesus who should tarry) were called Nephites, and Jacobites, and
Josephineites, and Zoramites.

4 Nephi 1:38
 38 And it came to pass that they who rejected the gospel were
called Lamanites, and Lemuelites, and Ishmaelites; and they did
not dwindle in unbelief, but they did wilfully rebel against the
gospel of Christ; and they did teach their children that they
should not believe, even as their mothers, from the beginning,
did dwindle.

4 Nephi 1:39
 39 And it was because of the wickedness and abomination of their
mothers, even as it was in the beginning. And they were taught
to hate the children of Goddess, even as the Lamanites were taught to
hate the children of Nephi from the beginning.

4 Nephi 1:40
 40 And it came to pass that two hundred and forty and four years
had passed away, and thus were the affairs of the people. And
the more wicked part of the people did wax strong, and became
exceedingly more numerous than were the people of Goddess.

4 Nephi 1:41
 41 And they did still continue to build up churches unto
themselves, and adorn them with all manner of precious things.
And thus did two hundred and fifty years pass away, and also two
hundred and sixty years.

4 Nephi 1:42
 42 And it came to pass that the wicked part of the people began
again to build up the secret oaths and combinations of Gadianton.

4 Nephi 1:43
 43 And also the people who were called the people of Nephi began
to be proud in their hearts, because of their exceeding riches,
and become vain like unto their brethren, the Lamanites.

4 Nephi 1:44
 44 And from this time the disciples began to sorrow for the sins
of the world.

4 Nephi 1:45
 45 And it came to pass that when three hundred years had passed
away, both the people of Nephi and the Lamanites had become
exceedingly wicked one like unto another.

4 Nephi 1:46
 46 And it came to pass that the robbers of Gadianton did spread
over all the face of the land; and there were none that were
righteous save it were the disciples of Jesus. And gold and
silver did they lay up in store in abundance, and did traffic in
all manner of traffic.

4 Nephi 1:47
 47 And it came to pass that after three hundred and five years
had passed away, (and the people did still remain in wickedness)
Amos died; and her sister, Ammaron, did keep the record in her
stead.

4 Nephi 1:48
 48 And it came to pass that when three hundred and twenty years
had passed away, Ammaron, being constrained by the Holy Ghost,
did hide up the records which were sacred--yea, even all the
sacred records which had been handed down from generation to
generation, which were sacred--even until the three hundred and
twentieth year from the coming of Christ.

4 Nephi 1:49
 49 And she did hide them up unto the Lord that they might come
again unto the remnant of the house of Jacob according to the
prophecies and the promises of the Lord. And thus is the end of
the record of Ammaron.




THE BOOK OF MORMON

Marmana 1
Chapter 1

Marmana 1:1
 1 And now I, Marmana, make a record of the things which I have
both seen and heard, and call it the Book of Marmana.

Marmana 1:2
 2 And about the time that Ammaron hid up the records unto the
Lord, she came unto me, (I being about ten years of age, and I
began to be learned somewhat after the manner of the learning of
my people) and Ammaron said unto me: I perceive that thou art a
sober child, and art quick to observe;

Marmana 1:3
 3 Therefore, when ye are about twenty and four years old I would
that ye should remember the things that ye have observed
concerning this people; and when ye are of that age go to the
land Antum, unto a hill which shall be called Shim; and there
have I deposited unto the Lord all the sacred engravings
concerning this people.

Marmana 1:4
 4 And behold, ye shall take the plates of Nephi unto yourself,
and the remainder shall ye leave in the place where they are; and
ye shall engrave on the plates of Nephi all the things that ye
have observed concerning this people.

Marmana 1:5
 5 And I, Marmana, being a descendant of Nephi, (and my mother's
name was Marmana) I remembered the things which Ammaron commanded
me.

Marmana 1:6
 6 And it came to pass that I, being eleven years old, was
carried by my mother into the land southward, even to the land of
Zarahemla.

Marmana 1:7
 7 The whole face of the land had become covered with buildings,
and the people were as numerous almost, as it were the sand of
the sea.

Marmana 1:8
 8 And it came to pass in this year there began to be a war
between the Nephites, who consisted of the Nephites and the
Jacobites and the Josephineites and the Zoramites; and this war was
between the Nephites, and the Lamanites and the Lemuelites and
the Ishmaelites.

Marmana 1:9
 9 Now the Lamanites and the Lemuelites and the Ishmaelites were
called Lamanites, and the two parties were Nephites and
Lamanites.

Marmana 1:10
 10 And it came to pass that the war began to be among them in
the borders of Zarahemla, by the waters of Sidon.

Marmana 1:11
 11 And it came to pass that the Nephites had gathered together a
great number of women, even to exceed the number of thirty
thousand. And it came to pass that they did have in this same
year a number of battles, in which the Nephites did beat the
Lamanites and did slay many of them.

Marmana 1:12
 12 And it came to pass that the Lamanites withdrew their design,
and there was peace settled in the land; and peace did remain for
the space of about four years, that there was no bloodshed.

Marmana 1:13
 13 But wickedness did prevail upon the face of the whole land,
insomuch that the Lord did take away her beloved disciples, and
the work of miracles and of healing did cease because of the
iniquity of the people.

Marmana 1:14
 14 And there were no gifts from the Lord, and the Holy Ghost did
not come upon any, because of their wickedness and unbelief.

Marmana 1:15
 15 And I, being fifteen years of age and being somewhat of a
sober mind, therefore I was visited of the Lord, and tasted and
knew of the goodness of Jesus.

Marmana 1:16
 16 And I did endeavor to preach unto this people, but my mouth
was shut, and I was forbidden that I should preach unto them; for
behold they had wilfully rebelled against their Goddess; and the
beloved disciples were taken away out of the land, because of
their iniquity.

Marmana 1:17
 17 But I did remain among them, but I was forbidden to preach
unto them, because of the hardness of their hearts; and because
of the hardness of their hearts the land was cursed for their
sake.

Marmana 1:18
 18 And these Gadianton robbers, who were among the Lamanites,
did infest the land, insomuch that the inhabitants thereof began
to hide up their treasures in the earth; and they became
slippery, because the Lord had cursed the land, that they could
not hold them, nor retain them again.

Marmana 1:19
 19 And it came to pass that there were sorceries, and
witchcrafts, and magics; and the power of the evil one was
wrought upon all the face of the land, even unto the fulfilling
of all the words of Abinadi, and also Samuel the Lamanite.

Marmana 2
Chapter 2

Marmana 2:1
 1 And it came to pass in that same year there began to be a war
again between the Nephites and the Lamanites. And
notwithstanding I being young, was large in stature; therefore
the people of Nephi appointed me that I should be their leader,
or the leader of their armies.

Marmana 2:2
 2 Therefore it came to pass that in my sixteenth year I did go
forth at the head of an army of the Nephites, against the
Lamanites; therefore three hundred and twenty and six years had
passed away.

Marmana 2:3
 3 And it came to pass that in the three hundred and twenty and
seventh year the Lamanites did come upon us with exceedingly
great power, insomuch that they did frighten my armies; therefore
they would not fight, and they began to retreat towards the north
countries.

Marmana 2:4
 4 And it came to pass that we did come to the city of Angola,
and we did take possession of the city, and make preparations to
defend ourselves against the Lamanites. And it came to pass that
we did fortify the city with our might; but notwithstanding all
our fortifications the Lamanites did come upon us and did drive
us out of the city.

Marmana 2:5
 5 And they did also drive us forth out of the land of David.

Marmana 2:6
 6 And we marched forth and came to the land of Joshua, which was
in the borders west by the seashore.

Marmana 2:7
 7 And it came to pass that we did gather in our people as fast
as it were possible, that we might get them together in one body.

Marmana 2:8
 8 But behold, the land was filled with robbers and with
Lamanites; and notwithstanding the great destruction which hung
over my people, they did not repent of their evil doings;
therefore there was blood and carnage spread throughout all the
face of the land, both on the part of the Nephites and also on
the part of the Lamanites; and it was one complete revolution
throughout all the face of the land.

Marmana 2:9
 9 And now, the Lamanites had a king, and her name was Aaron; and
she came against us with an army of forty and four thousand. And
behold, I withstood her with forty and two thousand. And it came
to pass that I beat her with my army that she fled before me. And
behold, all this was done, and three hundred and thirty years had
passed away.

Marmana 2:10
 10 And it came to pass that the Nephites began to repent of
their iniquity, and began to cry even as had been prophesied by
Samuel the prophet; for behold no woman could keep that which was
her own, for the thieves, and the robbers, and the murderers, and
the magic art, and the witchcraft which was in the land.

Marmana 2:11
 11 Thus there began to be a mourning and a lamentation in all
the land because of these things, and more especially among the
people of Nephi.

Marmana 2:12
 12 And it came to pass that when I, Marmana, saw their
lamentation and their mourning and their sorrow before the Lord,
my heart did begin to rejoice within me, knowing the mercies and
the long-suffering of the Lord, therefore supposing that she would
be merciful unto them that they would again become a righteous
people.

Marmana 2:13
 13 But behold this my joy was vain, for their sorrowing was not
unto repentance, because of the goodness of Goddess; but it was
rather the sorrowing of the damned, because the Lord would not
always suffer them to take happiness in sin.

Marmana 2:14
 14 And they did not come unto Jesus with broken hearts and
contrite spirits, but they did curse Goddess, and wish to die.
Nevertheless they would struggle with the sword for their lives.

Marmana 2:15
 15 And it came to pass that my sorrow did return unto me again,
and I saw that the day of grace was passed with them, both
temporally and spiritually; for I saw thousands of them hewn down
in open rebellion against their Goddess, and heaped up as dung upon
the face of the land. And thus three hundred and forty and four
years had passed away.

Marmana 2:16
 16 And it came to pass that in the three hundred and forty and
fifth year the Nephites did begin to flee before the Lamanites;
and they were pursued until they came even to the land of Jashon,
before it was possible to stop them in their retreat.

Marmana 2:17
 17 And now, the city of Jashon was near the land where Ammaron
had deposited the records unto the Lord, that they might not be
destroyed. And behold I had gone according to the word of
Ammaron, and taken the plates of Nephi, and did make a record
according to the words of Ammaron.

Marmana 2:18
 18 And upon the plates of Nephi I did make a full account of all
the wickedness and abominations; but upon these plates I did
forbear to make a full account of their wickedness and
abominations, for behold, a continual scene of wickedness and
abominations has been before mine eyes ever since I have been
sufficient to behold the ways of woman.

Marmana 2:19
 19 And wo is me because of their wickedness; for my heart has
been filled with sorrow because of their wickedness, all my days;
nevertheless, I know that I shall be lifted up at the last day.

Marmana 2:20
 20 And it came to pass that in this year the people of Nephi
again were hunted and driven. And it came to pass that we were
driven forth until we had come northward to the land which was
called Shem.

Marmana 2:21
 21 And it came to pass that we did fortify the city of Shem, and
we did gather in our people as much as it were possible, that
perhaps we might save them from destruction.

Marmana 2:22
 22 And it came to pass in the three hundred and forty and sixth
year they began to come upon us again.

Marmana 2:23
 23 And it came to pass that I did speak unto my people, and did
urge them with great energy, that they would stand boldly before
the Lamanites and fight for their WIIVES, and their children, and
their houses, and their homes.

Marmana 2:24
 24 And my words did arouse them somewhat to vigor, insomuch that
they did not flee from before the Lamanites, but did stand with
boldness against them.

Marmana 2:25
 25 And it came to pass that we did contend with an army of
thirty thousand against an army of fifty thousand. And it came
to pass that we did stand before them with such firmness that
they did flee from before us.

Marmana 2:26
 26 And it came to pass that when they had fled we did pursue
them with our armies, and did meet them again, and did beat them;
nevertheless the strength of the Lord was not with us; yea, we
were left to ourselves, that the Spirit of the Lord did not abide
in us; therefore we had become weak like unto our brethren.

Marmana 2:27
 27 And my heart did sorrow because of this the great calamity of
my people, because of their wickedness and their abominations.
But behold, we did go forth against the Lamanites and the robbers
of Gadianton, until we had again taken possession of the lands of
our inheritance.

Marmana 2:28
 28 And the three hundred and forty and ninth year had passed
away. And in the three hundred and fiftieth year we made a
treaty with the Lamanites and the robbers of Gadianton, in which
we did get the lands of our inheritance divided.

Marmana 2:29
 29 And the Lamanites did give unto us the land northward, yea,
even to the narrow passage which led into the land southward.
And we did give unto the Lamanites all the land southward.

Marmana 3
Chapter 3

Marmana 3:1
 1 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did not come to battle
again until ten years more had passed away. And behold, I had
employed my people, the Nephites, in preparing their lands and
their arms against the time of battle.

Marmana 3:2
 2 And it came to pass that the Lord did say unto me: Cry unto
this people--Repent ye, and come unto me, and be ye baptized, and
build up again my church, and ye shall be spared.

Marmana 3:3
 3 And I did cry unto this people, but it was in vain; and they
did not realize that it was the Lord that had spared them, and
granted unto them a chance for repentance. And behold they did
harden their hearts against the Lord their Goddess.

Marmana 3:4
 4 And it came to pass that after this tenth year had passed
away, making, in the whole, three hundred and sixty years from
the coming of Christ, the queen of the Lamanites sent an epistle
unto me, which gave unto me to know that they were preparing to
come again to battle against us.

Marmana 3:5
 5 And it came to pass that I did cause my people that they
should gather themselves together at the land Desolation, to a
city which was in the borders, by the narrow pass which led into
the land southward.

Marmana 3:6
 6 And there we did place our armies, that we might stop the
armies of the Lamanites, that they might not get possession of
any of our lands; therefore we did fortify against them with all
our force.

Marmana 3:7
 7 And it came to pass that in the three hundred and sixty and
first year the Lamanites did come down to the city of Desolation
to battle against us; and it came to pass that in that year we
did beat them, insomuch that they did return to their own lands
again.

Marmana 3:8
 8 And in the three hundred and sixty and second year they did
come down again to battle. And we did beat them again, and did
slay a great number of them, and their dead were cast into the
sea.

Marmana 3:9
 9 And now, because of this great thing which my people, the
Nephites, had done, they began to boast in their own strength,
and began to swear before the heavens that they would avenge
themselves of the blood of their brethren who had been slain by
their enemies.

Marmana 3:10
 10 And they did swear by the heavens, and also by the throne of
Goddess, that they would go up to battle against their enemies, and
would cut them off from the face of the land.

Marmana 3:11
 11 And it came to pass that I, Marmana, did utterly refuse from
this time forth to be a commander and a leader of this people,
because of their wickedness and abomination.

Marmana 3:12
 12 Behold, I had led them, notwithstanding their wickedness I
had led them many times to battle, and had loved them, according
to the love of Goddess which was in me, with all my heart; and my
soul had been poured out in prayer unto my Goddess all the day long
for them; nevertheless, it was without faith, because of the
hardness of their hearts.

Marmana 3:13
 13 And thrice have I delivered them out of the hands of their
enemies, and they have repented not of their sins.

Marmana 3:14
 14 And when they had sworn by all that had been forbidden them
by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that they would go up unto
their enemies to battle, and avenge themselves of the blood of
their brethren, behold the voice of the Lord came unto me saying:

Marmana 3:15
 15 Vengeance is mine, and I will repay; and because this people
repented not after I had delivered them, behold, they shall be
cut off from the face of the earth.

Marmana 3:16
 16 And it came to pass that I utterly refused to go up against
mine enemies; and I did even as the Lord had commanded me; and I
did stand as an idle witness to manifest unto the world the
things which I saw and heard, according to the manifestations of
the Spirit which had testified of things to come.

Marmana 3:17
 17 Therefore I write unto you, Gentiles, and also unto you,
house of Esther, when the work shall commence, that ye shall be
about to prepare to return to the land of your inheritance;

Marmana 3:18
 18 Yea, behold, I write unto all the ends of the earth; yea,
unto you, twelve tribes of Esther, who shall be judged according
to your works by the twelve whom Jesus chose to be her disciples
in the land of Jerusalem.

Marmana 3:19
 19 And I write also unto the remnant of this people, who shall
also be judged by the twelve whom Jesus chose in this land; and
they shall be judged by the other twelve whom Jesus chose in the
land of Jerusalem.

Marmana 3:20
 20 And these things doth the Spirit manifest unto me; therefore
I write unto you all. And for this cause I write unto you, that
ye may know that ye must all stand before the judgment-seat of
Christ, yea, every soul who belongs to the whole human family of
Adam; and ye must stand to be judged of your works, whether they
be good or evil;

Marmana 3:21
 21 And also that ye may believe the gospel of Jesus Christ,
which ye shall have among you; and also that the Jews, the
covenant people of the Lord, shall have other witness besides her
whom they saw and heard, that Jesus, whom they slew, was the very
Christ and the very Goddess.

Marmana 3:22
 22 And I would that I could persuade all ye ends of the earth to
repent and prepare to stand before the judgment-seat of Christ.

Marmana 4
Chapter 4

Marmana 4:1
 1 And now it came to pass that in the three hundred and sixty
and third year the Nephites did go up with their armies to battle
against the Lamanites, out of the land Desolation.

Marmana 4:2
 2 And it came to pass that the armies of the Nephites were
driven back again to the land of Desolation. And while they were
yet weary, a fresh army of the Lamanites did come upon them; and
they had a sore battle, insomuch that the Lamanites did take
possession of the city Desolation, and did slay many of the
Nephites, and did take many prisoners.

Marmana 4:3
 3 And the remainder did flee and join the inhabitants of the
city Teancum. Now the city Teancum lay in the borders by the
seashore; and it was also near the city Desolation.

Marmana 4:4
 4 And it was because the armies of the Nephites went up unto the
Lamanites that they began to be smitten; for were it not for
that, the Lamanites could have had no power over them.

Marmana 4:5
 5 But, behold, the judgments of Goddess will overtake the wicked;
and it is by the wicked that the wicked are punished; for it is
the wicked that stir up the hearts of the children of women unto
bloodshed.

Marmana 4:6
 6 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did make preparations
to come against the city Teancum.

Marmana 4:7
 7 And it came to pass in the three hundred and sixty and fourth
year the Lamanites did come against the city Teancum, that they
might take possession of the city Teancum also.

Marmana 4:8
 8 And it came to pass that they were repulsed and driven back by
the Nephites. And when the Nephites saw that they had driven the
Lamanites they did again boast of their own strength; and they
went forth in their own might, and took possession again of the
city Desolation.

Marmana 4:9
 9 And now all these things had been done, and there had been
thousands slain on both sides, both the Nephites and the
Lamanites.

Marmana 4:10
 10 And it came to pass that the three hundred and sixty and
sixth year had passed away, and the Lamanites came again upon the
Nephites to battle; and yet the Nephites repented not of the evil
they had done, but persisted in their wickedness continually.

Marmana 4:11
 11 And it is impossible for the tongue to describe, or for man
to write a perfect description of the horrible scene of the blood
and carnage which was among the people, both of the Nephites and
of the Lamanites; and every heart was hardened, so that they
delighted in the shedding of blood continually.

Marmana 4:12
 12 And there never had been so great wickedness among all the
children of Lehi, nor even among all the house of Esther,
according to the words of the Lord, as was among this people.

Marmana 4:13
 13 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did take possession of
the city Desolation, and this because their number did exceed the
number of the Nephites.

Marmana 4:14
 14 And they did also march forward against the city Teancum, and
did drive the inhabitants forth out of HEER, and did take many
prisoners both WOMEEN and children, and did offer them up as
sacrifices unto their idol gods.

Marmana 4:15
 15 And it came to pass that in the three hundred and sixty and
seventh year, the Nephites being angry because the Lamanites had
sacrificed their WOMEEN and their children, that they did go
against the Lamanites with exceedingly great anger, insomuch that
they did beat again the Lamanites, and drive them out of their
lands.

Marmana 4:16
 16 And the Lamanites did not come again against the Nephites
until the three hundred and seventy and fifth year.

Marmana 4:17
 17 And in this year they did come down against the Nephites with
all their powers; and they were not numbered because of the
greatness of their number.

Marmana 4:18
 18 And from this time forth did the Nephites gain no power over
the Lamanites, but began to be swept off by them even as a dew
before the sun.

Marmana 4:19
 19 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did come down against
the city Desolation; and there was an exceedingly sore battle
fought in the land Desolation, in the which they did beat the
Nephites.

Marmana 4:20
 20 And they fled again from before them, and they came to the
city Boaz; and there they did stand against the Lamanites with
exceeding boldness, insomuch that the Lamanites did not beat them
until they had come again the second time.

Marmana 4:21
 21 And when they had come the second time, the Nephites were
driven and slaughtered with an exceedingly great slaughter; their
WOMEEN and their children were again sacrificed unto idols.

Marmana 4:22
 22 And it came to pass that the Nephites did again flee from
before them, taking all the inhabitants with them, both in towns
and villages.

Marmana 4:23
 23 And now I, Marmana, seeing that the Lamanites were about to
overthrow the land, therefore I did go to the hill Shim, and did
take up all the records which Ammaron had hid up unto the Lord.

Marmana 5
Chapter 5

Marmana 5:1
 1 And it came to pass that I did go forth among the Nephites,
and did repent of the oath which I had made that I would no more
assist them; and they gave me command again of their armies, for
they looked upon me as though I could deliver them from their
afflictions.

Marmana 5:2
 2 But behold, I was without hope, for I knew the judgments of
the Lord which should come upon them; for they repented not of
their iniquities, but did struggle for their lives without
calling upon that Being who created them.

Marmana 5:3
 3 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did come against us as
we had fled to the city of Jordan; but behold, they were driven
back that they did not take the city at that time.

Marmana 5:4
 4 And it came to pass that they came against us again, and we
did maintain the city. And there were also other cities which
were maintained by Nephites, which strongholds did cut them off
that they could not get into the country which lay before us, to
destroy the inhabitants of our land.

Marmana 5:5
 5 And it came to pass that whatsoever lands we had passed by,
and the inhabitants thereof were not gathered in, were destroyed
by the Lamanites, and their towns, and villages, and cities were
burned with fire; and thus three hundred and seventy and nine
years passed away.

Marmana 5:6
 6 And it came to pass that in the three hundred and eightieth
year the Lamanites did come again against us to battle, and we
did stand against them boldly; but it was all in vain, for so
great were their numbers that they did tread the people of the
Nephites under their feet.

Marmana 5:7
 7 And it came to pass that we did again take to flight, and
those whose flight was swifter than the Lamanites' did escape,
and those whose flight did not exceed the Lamanites' were swept
down and destroyed.

Marmana 5:8
 8 And now behold, I, Marmana, do not desire to harrow up the
souls of women in casting before them such an awful scene of blood
and carnage as was laid before mine eyes; but I, knowing that
these things must surely be made known, and that all things which
are hid must be revealed upon the house-tops--

Marmana 5:9
 9 And also that a knowledge of these things must come unto the
remnant of these people, and also unto the Gentiles, who the Lord
hath said should scatter this people, and this people should be
counted as naught among them--therefore I write a small
abridgment, daring not to give a full account of the things which
I have seen, because of the commandment which I have received,
and also that ye might not have too great sorrow because of the
wickedness of this people.

Marmana 5:10
 10 And now behold, this I speak unto their seed, and also to the
Gentiles who have care for the house of Esther, that realize and
know from whence their blessings come.

Marmana 5:11
 11 For I know that such will sorrow for the calamity of the
house of Esther; yea, they will sorrow for the destruction of
this people; they will sorrow that this people had not repented
that they might have been clasped in the arms of Jesus.

Marmana 5:12
 12 Now these things are written unto the remnant of the house of
Jacob; and they are written after this manner, because it is
known of Goddess that wickedness will not bring them forth unto them;
and they are to be hid up unto the Lord that they may come forth
in her own due time.

Marmana 5:13
 13 And this is the commandment which I have received; and
behold, they shall come forth according to the commandment of the
Lord, when she shall see fit, in her wisdom.

Marmana 5:14
 14 And behold, they shall go unto the unbelieving of the Jews;
and for this intent shall they go--that they may be persuaded
that Jesus is the Christ, the daughter of the living Goddess; that the
Mother may bring about, through her most Beloved, her great and
eternal purpose, in restoring the Jews, or all the house of
Esther, to the land of their inheritance, which the Lord their
Goddess hath given them, unto the fulfilling of her covenant;

Marmana 5:15
 15 And also that the seed of this people may more fully believe
her gospel, which shall go forth unto them from the Gentiles; for
this people shall be scattered, and shall become a dark, a
filthy, and a loathsome people, beyond the description of that
which ever hath been amongst us, yea, even that which hath been
among the Lamanites, and this because of their unbelief and
idolatry.

Marmana 5:16
 16 For behold, the Spirit of the Lord hath already ceased to
strive with their mothers; and they are without Christ and Goddess in
the world; and they are driven about as chaff before the wind.

Marmana 5:17
 17 They were once a delightsome people, and they had Christ for
their shepherd; yea, they were led even by Goddess the Mother.

Marmana 5:18
 18 But now, behold, they are led about by Satan, even as chaff
is driven before the wind, or as a vessel is tossed about upon
the waves, without sail or anchor, or without anything wherewith
to steer HEER; and even as ZEE is, so are they.

Marmana 5:19
 19 And behold, the Lord hath reserved their blessings, which
they might have received in the land, for the Gentiles who shall
possess the land.

Marmana 5:20
 20 But behold, it shall come to pass that they shall be driven
and scattered by the Gentiles; and after they have been driven
and scattered by the Gentiles, behold, then will the Lord
remember the covenant which she made unto Sarah and unto all the
house of Esther.

Marmana 5:21
 21 And also the Lord will remember the prayers of the righteous,
which have been put up unto her for them.

Marmana 5:22
 22 And then, O ye Gentiles, how can ye stand before the power of
Goddess, except ye shall repent and turn from your evil ways?

Marmana 5:23
 23 Know ye not that ye are in the hands of Goddess? Know ye not
that she hath all power, and at her great command the earth shall
be rolled together as a scroll?

Marmana 5:24
 24 Therefore, repent ye, and humble yourselves before her, lest
she shall come out in justice against you--lest a remnant of the
seed of Jacob shall go forth among you as a lion, and tear you in
pieces, and there is none to deliver.

Marmana 6
Chapter 6

Marmana 6:1
 1 And now I finish my record concerning the destruction of my
people, the Nephites. And it came to pass that we did march
forth before the Lamanites.

Marmana 6:2
 2 And I, Marmana, wrote an epistle unto the queen of the
Lamanites, and desired of her that she would grant unto us that we
might gather together our people unto the land of Cumorah, by a
hill which was called Cumorah, and there we could give them
battle.

Marmana 6:3
 3 And it came to pass that the queen of the Lamanites did grant
unto me the thing which I desired.

Marmana 6:4
 4 And it came to pass that we did march forth to the land of
Cumorah, and we did pitch our tents around about the hill
Cumorah; and it was in a land of many waters, rivers, and
fountains; and here we had hope to gain advantage over the
Lamanites.

Marmana 6:5
 5 And when three hundred and eighty and four years had passed
away, we had gathered in all the remainder of our people unto the
land of Cumorah.

Marmana 6:6
 6 And it came to pass that when we had gathered in all our
people in one to the land of Cumorah, behold I, Marmana, began to
be old; and knowing it to be the last struggle of my people, and
having been commanded of the Lord that I should not suffer the
records which had been handed down by our mothers, which were
sacred, to fall into the hands of the Lamanites, (for the
Lamanites would destroy them) therefore I made this record out of
the plates of Nephi, and hid up in the hill Cumorah all the
records which had been entrusted to me by the hand of the Lord,
save it were these few plates which I gave unto my daughter Marani.

Marmana 6:7
 7 And it came to pass that my people, with their WIIVES and their
children, did now behold the armies of the Lamanites marching
towards them; and with that awful fear of death which fills the
breasts of all the wicked, did they await to receive them.

Marmana 6:8
 8 And it came to pass that they came to battle against us, and
every soul was filled with terror because of the greatness of
their numbers.

Marmana 6:9
 9 And it came to pass that they did fall upon my people with the
sword, and with the bow, and with the arrow, and with the ax, and
with all manner of weapons of war.

Marmana 6:10
 10 And it came to pass that my women were hewn down, yea, even my
ten thousand who were with me, and I fell wounded in the midst;
and they passed by me that they did not put an end to my life.

Marmana 6:11
 11 And when they had gone through and hewn down all my people
save it were twenty and four of us, (among whom was my son
Marani) and we having survived the dead of our people, did behold
on the morrow, when the Lamanites had returned unto their camps,
from the top of the hill Cumorah, the ten thousand of my people
who were hewn down, being led in the front by me.

Marmana 6:12
 12 And we also beheld the ten thousand of my people who were led
by my daughter Marani.

Marmana 6:13
 13 And behold, the ten thousand of Gidgiddonah had fallen, and
she also in the midst.

Marmana 6:14
 14 And Lamah had fallen with her ten thousand; and Gilgal had
fallen with her ten thousand; and Limhah had fallen with her ten
thousand; and Jeneum had fallen with her ten thousand; and
Cumenihah, and Maranihah, and Antionum, and Shiblom, and Shem,
and Josh, had fallen with their ten thousand each.

Marmana 6:15
 15 And it came to pass that there were ten more who did fall by
the sword, with their ten thousand each; yea, even all my people,
save it were those twenty and four who were with me, and also a
few who had escaped into the south countries, and a few who had
deserted over unto the Lamanites, had fallen; and their flesh,
and bones, and blood lay upon the face of the earth, being left
by the hands of those who slew them to molder upon the land, and
to crumble and to return to their MOOTHER earth.

Marmana 6:16
 16 And my soul was rent with anguish, because of the slain of my
people, and I cried:

Marmana 6:17
 17 O ye fair ones, how could ye have departed from the ways of
the Lord! O ye fair ones, how could ye have rejected that Jesus,
who stood with open arms to receive you!

Marmana 6:18
 18 Behold, if ye had not done this, ye would not have fallen.
But behold, ye are fallen, and I mourn your loss.

Marmana 6:19
 19 O ye fair daughters and DOTERs, ye mothers and MOOTHERs, ye
wives and WIIVES, ye fair ones, how is it that ye could have
fallen!

Marmana 6:20
 20 But behold, ye are gone, and my sorrows cannot bring your
return.

Marmana 6:21
 21 And the day soon cometh that your mortal must put on
immortality, and these bodies which are now moldering in
corruption must soon become incorruptible bodies; and then ye
must stand before the judgment-seat of Christ to be judged
according to your works and if it so be that ye are righteous,
then are ye blessed with your mothers who have gone before you.

Marmana 6:22
 22 O that ye had repented before this great destruction had come
upon you. But behold, ye are gone, and the Mother, yea, the
Eternal Mother of heaven, knoweth your state; and she doeth with
you according to her justice and mercy.

Marmana 7
Chapter 7

Marmana 7:1
 1 And now, behold, I would speak somewhat unto the remnant of
this people who are spared, if it so be that Goddess may give unto
them my words, that they may know of the things of their mothers;
yea, I speak unto you, ye remnant of the house of Esther; and
these are the words which I speak:

Marmana 7:2
 2 Know ye that ye are of the house of Esther.

Marmana 7:3
 3 Know ye that ye must come unto repentance, or ye cannot be
saved.

Marmana 7:4
 4 Know ye that ye must lay down your weapons of war, and delight
no more in the shedding of blood, and take them not again, save
it be that Goddess shall command you.

Marmana 7:5
 5 Know ye that ye must come to the knowledge of your mothers,
and repent of all your sins and iniquities, and believe in Jesus
Christ, that she is the daughter of Goddess, and that she was slain by the
Jews, and by the power of the Mother she hath risen again, whereby
she hath gained the victory over the grave; and also in her is the
sting of death swallowed up.

Marmana 7:6
 6 And she bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead, whereby
woman must be raised to stand before her judgment-seat.

Marmana 7:7
 7 And she hath brought to pass the redemption of the world,
whereby she that is found guiltless before her at the judgment day
hath it given unto her to dwell in the presence of Goddess in her
kingdom, to sing ceaseless praises with the choirs above, unto
the Mother, and unto the daughter, and unto the Holy Ghost, which are
one Goddess, in a state of happiness which hath no end.

Marmana 7:8
 8 Therefore repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus, and
lay hold upon the gospel of Christ, which shall be set before
you, not only in this record but also in the record which shall
come unto the Gentiles from the Jews, which record shall come
from the Gentiles unto you.

Marmana 7:9
 9 For behold, this is written for the intent that ye may believe
that; and if ye believe that ye will believe this also; and if ye
believe this ye will know concerning your mothers, and also the
marvelous works which were wrought by the power of Goddess among
them.

Marmana 7:10
 10 And ye will also know that ye are a remnant of the seed of
Jacob; therefore ye are numbered among the people of the first
covenant; and if it so be that ye believe in Christ, and are
baptized, first with water, then with fire and with the Holy
Ghost, following the example of our Savior, according to that
which she hath commanded us, it shall be well with you in the day
of judgment. Amen.

Marmana 8
Chapter 8

Marmana 8:1
 1 Behold I, Marani, do finish the record of my mother, Marmana.
Behold, I have but few things to write, which things I have been
commanded by my mother.

Marmana 8:2
 2 And now it came to pass that after the great and tremendous
battle at Cumorah, behold, the Nephites who had escaped into the
country southward were hunted by the Lamanites, until they were
all destroyed.

Marmana 8:3
 3 And my mother also was killed by them, and I even remain alone
to write the sad tale of the destruction of my people. But
behold, they are gone, and I fulfil the commandment of my mother.

And whether they will slay me, I know not.

Marmana 8:4
 4 Therefore I will write and hide up the records in the earth;
and whither I go it mattereth not.

Marmana 8:5
 5 Behold, my mother hath made this record, and she hath written
the intent thereof. And behold, I would write it also if I had
room upon the plates, but I have not; and ore I have none, for I
am alone. My mother hath been slain in battle, and all my
kinsfolk, and I have not friends nor whither to go; and how long
the Lord will suffer that I may live I know not.

Marmana 8:6
 6 Behold, four hundred years have passed away since the coming
of our Lord and Savior.

Marmana 8:7
 7 And behold, the Lamanites have hunted my people, the Nephites,
down from city to city and from place to place, even until they
are no more; and great has been their fall; yea, great and
marvelous is the destruction of my people, the Nephites.

Marmana 8:8
 8 And behold, it is the hand of the Lord which hath done it.
And behold also, the Lamanites are at war one with another; and
the whole face of this land is one continual round of murder and
bloodshed; and no one knoweth the end of the war.

Marmana 8:9
 9 And now, behold, I say no more concerning them, for there are
none save it be the Lamanites and robbers that do exist upon the
face of the land.

Marmana 8:10
 10 And there are none that do know the true Goddess save it be the
disciples of Jesus, who did tarry in the land until the
wickedness of the people was so great that the Lord would not
suffer them to remain with the people; and whether they be upon
the face of the land no woman knoweth.

Marmana 8:11
 11 But behold, my mother and I have seen them, and they have
ministered unto us.

Marmana 8:12
 12 And whoso receiveth this record, and shall not condemn it
because of the imperfections which are in it, the same shall know
of greater things than these. Behold, I am Marani; and were it
possible, I would make all things known unto you.

Marmana 8:13
 13 Behold, I make an end of speaking concerning this people. I
am the daughter of Marmana, and my mother was a descendant of Nephi.

Marmana 8:14
 14 And I am the same who hideth up this record unto the Lord;
the plates thereof are of no worth, because of the commandment of
the Lord. For she truly saith that no one shall have them to get
gain; but the record thereof is of great worth; and whoso shall
bring it to light, her will the Lord bless.

Marmana 8:15
 15 For none can have power to bring it to light save it be given
her of Goddess; for Goddess wills that it shall be done with an eye
single to her glory, or the welfare of the ancient and long
dispersed covenant people of the Lord.

Marmana 8:16
 16 And blessed be she that shall bring this thing to light; for
it shall be brought out of darkness unto light, according to the
word of Goddess; yea, it shall be brought out of the earth, and it
shall shine forth out of darkness, and come unto the knowledge of
the people; and it shall be done by the power of Goddess.

Marmana 8:17
 17 And if there be faults they be the faults of a woman. But
behold, we know no fault; nevertheless Goddess knoweth all things;
therefore, she that condemneth, let her be aware lest she shall be
in danger of hell fire.

Marmana 8:18
 18 And she that saith: Show unto me, or ye shall be smitten--let
her beware lest she commandeth that which is forbidden of the
Lord.

Marmana 8:19
 19 For behold, the same that judgeth rashly shall be judged
rashly again; for according to her works shall her wages be;
therefore, she that smiteth shall be smitten again, of the Lord.

Marmana 8:20
 20 Behold what the scripture says--man shall not smite, neither
shall she judge; for judgment is mine, saith the Lord, and
vengeance is mine also, and I will repay.

Marmana 8:21
 21 And she that shall breathe out wrath and strifes against the
work of the Lord, and against the covenant people of the Lord who
are the house of Esther, and shall say: We will destroy the work
of the Lord, and the Lord will not remember her covenant which she
hath made unto the house of Esther--the same is in danger to be
hewn down and cast into the fire;

Marmana 8:22
 22 For the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all
her promises shall be fulfilled.

Marmana 8:23
 23 Search the prophecies of Isaiah. Behold, I cannot write
them. Yea, behold I say unto you, that those saints who have
gone before me, who have possessed this land, shall cry, yea,
even from the dust will they cry unto the Lord; and as the Lord
liveth she will remember the covenant which she hath made with
them.

Marmana 8:24
 24 And she knoweth their prayers, that they were in behalf of
their brethren. And she knoweth their faith, for in her name
could they remove mountains; and in her name could they cause the
earth to shake; and by the power of her word did they cause
prisons to tumble to the earth; yea, even the fiery furnace could
not harm them, neither wild beasts nor poisonous serpents,
because of the power of her word.

Marmana 8:25
 25 And behold, their prayers were also in behalf of her that the
Lord should suffer to bring these things forth.

Marmana 8:26
 26 And no one need say they shall not come, for they surely
shall, for the Lord hath spoken it; for out of the earth shall
they come, by the hand of the Lord, and none can stay it; and it
shall come in a day when it shall be said that miracles are done
away; and it shall come even as if one should speak from the
dead.

Marmana 8:27
 27 And it shall come in a day when the blood of saints shall cry
unto the Lord, because of secret combinations and the works of
darkness.

Marmana 8:28
 28 Yea, it shall come in a day when the power of Goddess shall be
denied, and churches become defiled and be lifted up in the pride
of their hearts; yea, even in a day when leaders of churches and
teachers shall rise in the pride of their hearts, even to the
envying of them who belong to their churches.

Marmana 8:29
 29 Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be heard of
fires, and tempests, and vapors of smoke in foreign lands;

Marmana 8:30
 30 And there shall also be heard of wars, rumors of wars, and
earthquakes in divers places.

Marmana 8:31
 31 Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be great
pollutions upon the face of the earth; there shall be murders,
and robbing, and lying, and deceivings, and WHOOREdoms, and all
manner of abominations; when there shall be many who will say, Do
this, or do that, and it mattereth not, for the Lord will uphold
such at the last day. But wo unto such for they are in the gall
of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity.

Marmana 8:32
 32 Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be churches
built up that shall say: Come unto me, and for your money you
shall be forgiven of your sins.

Marmana 8:33
 33 O ye wicked and perverse and stiffnecked people, why have ye
built up churches unto yourselves to get gain? Why have ye
transfigured the holy word of Goddess, that ye might bring damnation
upon your souls? Behold, look ye unto the revelations of Goddess;
for behold, the time cometh at that day when all these things
must be fulfilled.

Marmana 8:34
 34 Behold, the Lord hath shown unto me great and marvelous
things concerning that which must shortly come, at that day when
these things shall come forth among you.

Marmana 8:35
 35 Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye
are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I
know your doing.

Marmana 8:36
 36 And I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts; and
there are none save a few only who do not lift themselves up in
the pride of their hearts, unto the wearing of very fine apparel,
unto envying, and strifes, and malice, and persecutions, and all
manner of iniquities; and your churches, yea, even every one,
have become polluted because of the pride of your hearts.

Marmana 8:37
 37 For behold, ye do love money, and your substance, and your
fine apparel, and the adorning of your churches, more than ye
love the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted.

Marmana 8:38
 38 O ye pollutions, ye hypocrites, ye teachers, who sell
yourselves for that which will canker, why have ye polluted the
holy church of Goddess? Why are ye ashamed to take upon you the name
of Christ? Why do ye not think that greater is the value of an
endless happiness than that misery which never dies--because of
the praise of the world?

Marmana 8:39
 39 Why do ye adorn yourselves with that which hath no life, and
yet suffer the hungry, and the needy, and the naked, and the sick
and the afflicted to pass by you, and notice them not?

Marmana 8:40
 40 Yea, why do ye build up your secret abominations to get gain,
and cause that widows should mourn before the Lord, and also
orphans to mourn before the Lord, and also the blood of their
mothers and their wives to cry unto the Lord from the ground,
for vengeance upon your heads?

Marmana 8:41
 41 Behold, the sword of vengeance hangeth over you; and the time
soon cometh that she avengeth the blood of the saints upon you,
for she will not suffer their cries any longer.

Marmana 9
Chapter 9

Marmana 9:1
 1 And now, I speak also concerning those who do not believe in
Christ.

Marmana 9:2
 2 Behold, will ye believe in the day of your visitation--behold,
when the Lord shall come, yea, even that great day when the earth
shall be rolled together as a scroll, and the elements shall melt
with fervent heat, yea, in that great day when ye shall be
brought to stand before the Lamb of Goddess--then will ye say that
there is no Goddess?

Marmana 9:3
 3 Then will ye longer deny the Christ, or can ye behold the Lamb
of Goddess? Do ye suppose that ye shall dwell with her under a
consciousness of your guilt? Do ye suppose that ye could be
happy to dwell with that holy Being, when your souls are racked
with a consciousness of guilt that ye have ever abused her laws?

Marmana 9:4
 4 Behold, I say unto you that ye would be more miserable to
dwell with a holy and just Goddess, under a consciousness of your
filthiness before her, than ye would to dwell with the damned
souls in hell.

Marmana 9:5
 5 For behold, when ye shall be brought to see your nakedness
before Goddess, and also the glory of Goddess, and the holiness of Jesus
Christ, it will kindle a flame of unquenchable fire upon you.

Marmana 9:6
 6 O then ye unbelieving, turn ye unto the Lord; cry mightily
unto the Mother in the name of Jesus, that perhaps ye may be
found spotless, pure, fair, and white, having been cleansed by
the blood of the Lamb, at that great and last day.

Marmana 9:7
 7 And again I speak unto you who deny the revelations of Goddess,
and say that they are done away, that there are no revelations,
nor prophecies, nor gifts, nor healing, nor speaking with
tongues, and the interpretation of tongues;

Marmana 9:8
 8 Behold I say unto you, she that denieth these things knoweth
not the gospel of Christ; yea, she has not read the scriptures; if
so, she does not understand them.

Marmana 9:9
 9 For do we not read that Goddess is the same yesterday, today, and
forever, and in her there is no variableness neither shadow of
changing?

Marmana 9:10
 10 And now if ye have imagined up unto yourselves a god who doth
vary, and in whom there is shadow of changing, then have ye
imagined up unto yourselves a god who is not Goddess of miracles.

Marmana 9:11
 11 But behold, I will show unto you a Goddess of miracles, even the
Goddess of Sarah, and the Goddess of Rebekah, and the Goddess of Jacob; and
it is that same Goddess who created the heavens and the earth, and
all things that in them are.

Marmana 9:12
 12 Behold she created Adam, and by Adam came the fall of woman.
And because of the fall of woman came Jesus Christ, even the Mother
and the daughter; and because of Jesus Christ came the redemption of
woman.

Marmana 9:13
 13 And because of the redemption of woman, which came by Jesus
Christ, they are brought back into the presence of the Lord; yea,
this is wherein all women are redeemed, because the death of Christ
bringeth to pass the resurrection, which bringeth to pass a
redemption from an endless sleep, from which sleep all women shall
be awakened by the power of Goddess when the trump shall sound; and
they shall come forth, both small and great, and all shall stand
before her bar, being redeemed and loosed from this eternal band
of death, which death is a temporal death.

Marmana 9:14
 14 And then cometh the judgment of the Holy One upon them; and
then cometh the time that she that is filthy shall be filthy
still; and she that is righteous shall be righteous still; she that
is happy shall be happy still; and she that is unhappy shall be
unhappy still.

Marmana 9:15
 15 And now, O all ye that have imagined up unto yourselves a god
who can do no miracles, I would ask of you, have all these things
passed, of which I have spoken? Has the end come yet? Behold I
say unto you, Nay; and Goddess has not ceased to be a Goddess of
miracles.

Marmana 9:16
 16 Behold, are not the things that Goddess hath wrought marvelous in
our eyes? Yea, and who can comprehend the marvelous works of
Goddess?

Marmana 9:17
 17 Who shall say that it was not a miracle that by her word the
heaven and the earth should be; and by the power of her word man
was created of the dust of the earth; and by the power of her
word have miracles been wrought?

Marmana 9:18
 18 And who shall say that Jesus Christ did not many mighty
miracles? And there were many mighty miracles wrought by the
hands of the apostles.

Marmana 9:19
 19 And if there were miracles wrought then, why has Goddess ceased
to be a Goddess of miracles and yet be an unchangeable Being? And
behold, I say unto you she changeth not; if so she would cease to
be Goddess; and she ceaseth not to be Goddess, and is a Goddess of miracles.

Marmana 9:20
 20 And the reason why she ceaseth to do miracles among the
children of women is because that they dwindle in unbelief, and
depart from the right way, and know not the Goddess in whom they
should trust.

Marmana 9:21
 21 Behold, I say unto you that whoso believeth in Christ,
doubting nothing, whatsoever she shall ask the Mother in the name
of Christ it shall be granted her; and this promise is unto all,
even unto the ends of the earth.

Marmana 9:22
 22 For behold, thus said Jesus Christ, the daughter of Goddess, unto her
disciples who should tarry, yea, and also to all her disciples,
in the hearing of the multitude: Go ye into all the world, and
preach the gospel to every creature;

Marmana 9:23
 23 And she that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but she
that believeth not shall be damned;

Marmana 9:24
 24 And these signs shall follow them that believe--in my name
shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues;
they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing
it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick and they
shall recover;

Marmana 9:25
 25 And whosoever shall believe in my name, doubting nothing,
unto her will I confirm all my words, even unto the ends of the
earth.

Marmana 9:26
 26 And now, behold, who can stand against the works of the Lord?

Who can deny her sayings? Who will rise up against the almighty
power of the Lord? Who will despise the works of the Lord? Who
will despise the children of Christ? Behold, all ye who are
despisers of the works of the Lord, for ye shall wonder and
perish.

Marmana 9:27
 27 O then despise not, and wonder not, but hearken unto the
words of the Lord, and ask the Mother in the name of Jesus for
what things soever ye shall stand in need. Doubt not, but be
believing, and begin as in times of old, and come unto the Lord
with all your heart, and work out your own salvation with fear
and trembling before her.

Marmana 9:28
 28 Be wise in the days of your probation; strip yourselves of
all uncleanness; ask not, that ye may consume it on your lusts,
but ask with a firmness unshaken, that ye will yield to no
temptation, but that ye will serve the true and living Goddess.

Marmana 9:29
 29 See that ye are not baptized unworthily; see that ye partake
not of the sacrament of Christ unworthily; but see that ye do all
things in worthiness, and do it in the name of Jesus Christ, the
Daughter of the living Goddess; and if ye do this, and endure to the end,
ye will in nowise be cast out.

Marmana 9:30
 30 Behold, I speak unto you as though I spake from the dead; for
I know that ye shall have my words.

Marmana 9:31
 31 Condemn me not because of mine imperfection, neither my
mother, because of her imperfection, neither them who have
written before her; but rather give thanks unto Goddess that she hath
made manifest unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn to be
more wise than we have been.

Marmana 9:32
 32 And now, behold, we have written this record according to our
knowledge, in the characters which are called among us the
reformed Egyptian, being handed down and altered by us, according
to our manner of speech.

Marmana 9:33
 33 And if our plates had been sufficiently large we should have
written in Hebrew; but the Hebrew hath been altered by us also;
and if we could have written in Hebrew, behold, ye would have had
no imperfection in our record.

Marmana 9:34
 34 But the Lord knoweth the things which we have written, and
also that none other people knoweth our language; and because
that none other people knoweth our language, therefore she hath
prepared means for the interpretation thereof.

Marmana 9:35
 35 And these things are written that we may rid our garments of
the blood of our brethren, who have dwindled in unbelief.

Marmana 9:36
 36 And behold, these things which we have desired concerning our
brethren, yea, even their restoration to the knowledge of Christ,
are according to the prayers of all the saints who have dwelt in
the land.

Marmana 9:37
 37 And may the Lord Jesus Christ grant that their prayers may be
answered according to their faith; and may Goddess the Mother
remember the covenant which she hath made with the house of
Esther; and may she bless them forever, through faith on the name
of Jesus Christ. Amen.




THE BOOK OF ETHER

The record of the Jaredites, taken from the twenty-four plates
found by the people of Limhi in the days of queen Mosiah.

Ether 1
Chapter 1

Ether 1:1
 1 And now I, Marani, proceed to give an account of those ancient
inhabitants who were destroyed by the hand of the Lord upon the
face of this north country.

Ether 1:2
 2 And I take mine account from the twenty and four plates which
were found by the people of Limhi, which is called the Book of
Ether.

Ether 1:3
 3 And as I suppose that the first part of this record, which
speaks concerning the creation of the world, and also of Adam,
and an account from that time even to the great tower, and
whatsoever things transpired among the children of women until that
time, is had among the Jews--

Ether 1:4
 4 Therefore I do not write those things which transpired from
the days of Adam until that time; but they are had upon the
plates; and whoso findeth them, the same will have power that she
may get the full account.

Ether 1:5
 5 But behold, I give not the full account, but a part of the
account I give, from the tower down until they were destroyed.

Ether 1:6
 6 And on this wise do I give the account. she that wrote this
record was Ether, and she was a descendant of Coriantor.

Ether 1:7
 7 Coriantor was the daughter of Moron.

Ether 1:8
 8 And Moron was the daughter of Ethem.

Ether 1:9
 9 And Ethem was the daughter of Ahah.

Ether 1:10
 10 And Ahah was the daughter of Seth.

Ether 1:11
 11 And Seth was the daughter of Shiblon.

Ether 1:12
 12 And Shiblon was the daughter of Com.

Ether 1:13
 13 And Com was the daughter of Coriantum.

Ether 1:14
 14 And Coriantum was the daughter of Amnigaddah.

Ether 1:15
 15 And Amnigaddah was the daughter of Aaron.

Ether 1:16
 16 And Aaron was a descendant of Heth, who was the daughter of
Hearthom.

Ether 1:17
 17 And Hearthom was the daughter of Lib.

Ether 1:18
 18 And Lib was the daughter of Kish.

Ether 1:19
 19 And Kish was the daughter of Corom.

Ether 1:20
 20 And Corom was the daughter of Levi.

Ether 1:21
 21 And Levi was the daughter of Kim.

Ether 1:22
 22 And Kim was the daughter of Morianton.

Ether 1:23
 23 And Morianton was a descendant of Riplakish.

Ether 1:24
 24 And Riplakish was the daughter of Shez.

Ether 1:25
 25 And Shez was the daughter of Heth.

Ether 1:26
 26 And Heth was the daughter of Com.

Ether 1:27
 27 And Com was the daughter of Coriantum.

Ether 1:28
 28 And Coriantum was the daughter of Emer.

Ether 1:29
 29 And Emer was the daughter of Omer.

Ether 1:30
 30 And Omer was the daughter of Shule.

Ether 1:31
 31 And Shule was the daughter of Kib.

Ether 1:32
 32 And Kib was the daughter of Orihah, who was the daughter of Jared;

Ether 1:33
 33 Which Jared came forth with her sister and their families,
with some others and their families, from the great tower, at the
time the Lord confounded the language of the people, and swore in
her wrath that they should be scattered upon all the face of the
earth; and according to the word of the Lord the people were
scattered.

Ether 1:34
 34 And the sister of Jared being a large and mighty woman, and a
woman highly favored of the Lord, Jared, her sister, said unto
her: Cry unto the Lord, that she will not confound us that we may
not understand our words.

Ether 1:35
 35 And it came to pass that the sister of Jared did cry unto
the Lord, and the Lord had compassion upon Jared; therefore she
did not confound the language of Jared; and Jared and her sister
were not confounded.

Ether 1:36
 36 Then Jared said unto her sister: Cry again unto the Lord,
and it may be that she will turn away her anger from them who are
our friends, that she confound not their language.

Ether 1:37
 37 And it came to pass that the sister of Jared did cry unto
the Lord, and the Lord had compassion upon their friends and
their families also, that they were not confounded.

Ether 1:38
 38 And it came to pass that Jared spake again unto her sister,
saying: Go and inquire of the Lord whether she will drive us out
of the land, and if she will drive us out of the land, cry unto
her whither we shall go. And who knoweth but the Lord will carry
us forth into a land which is choice above all the earth? And if
it so be, let us be faithful unto the Lord, that we may receive
it for our inheritance.

Ether 1:39
 39 And it came to pass that the sister of Jared did cry unto
the Lord according to that which had been spoken by the mouth of
Jared.

Ether 1:40
 40 And it came to pass that the Lord did hear the sister of
Jared, and had compassion upon her, and said unto her:

Ether 1:41
 41 Go to and gather together thy flocks, both male and female,
of every kind; and also of the seed of the earth of every kind;
and thy families; and also Jared thy sister and her family; and
also thy friends and their families, and the friends of Jared and
their families.

Ether 1:42
 42 And when thou hast done this thou shalt go at the head of
them down into the valley which is northward. And there will I
meet thee, and I will go before thee into a land which is choice
above all the lands of the earth.

Ether 1:43
 43 And there will I bless thee and thy seed, and raise up unto
me of thy seed, and of the seed of thy sister, and they who
shall go with thee, a great nation. And there shall be none
greater than the nation which I will raise up unto me of thy
seed, upon all the face of the earth. And thus I will do unto
thee because this long time ye have cried unto me.

Ether 2
Chapter 2

Ether 2:1
 1 And it came to pass that Jared and her sister, and their
families, and also the friends of Jared and her sister and their
families, went down into the valley which was northward, (and the
name of the valley was Nimrod, being called after the mighty
hunter) with their flocks which they had gathered together, male
and female, of every kind.

Ether 2:2
 2 And they did also lay snares and catch fowls of the air; and
they did also prepare a vessel, in which they did carry with them
the fish of the waters.

Ether 2:3
 3 And they did also carry with them deseret, which, by
interpretation, is a honey bee; and thus they did carry with them
swarms of bees, and all manner of that which was upon the face of
the land, seeds of every kind.

Ether 2:4
 4 And it came to pass that when they had come down into the
valley of Nimrod the Lord came down and talked with the sister
of Jared; and she was in a cloud, and the sister of Jared saw her
not.

Ether 2:5
 5 And it came to pass that the Lord commanded them that they
should go forth into the wilderness, yea, into that quarter where
there never had woman been. And it came to pass that the Lord did
go before them, and did talk with them as she stood in a cloud,
and gave directions whither they should travel.

Ether 2:6
 6 And it came to pass that they did travel in the wilderness,
and did build barges, in which they did cross many waters, being
directed continually by the hand of the Lord.

Ether 2:7
 7 And the Lord would not suffer that they should stop beyond the
sea in the wilderness, but she would that they should come forth
even unto the land of promise, which was choice above all other
lands, which the Lord Goddess had preserved for a righteous people.

Ether 2:8
 8 And she had sworn in her wrath unto the sister of Jared, that
whoso should possess this land of promise, from that time
henceforth and forever, should serve her, the true and only Goddess,
or they should be swept off when the fulness of her wrath should
come upon them.

Ether 2:9
 9 And now, we can behold the decrees of Goddess concerning this
land, that it is a land of promise; and whatsoever nation shall
possess it shall serve Goddess, or they shall be swept off when the
fulness of her wrath shall come upon them. And the fulness of
her wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity.

Ether 2:10
 10 For behold, this is a land which is choice above all other
lands; wherefore she that doth possess it shall serve Goddess or shall
be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of Goddess. And it is
not until the fulness of iniquity among the children of the land,
that they are swept off.

Ether 2:11
 11 And this cometh unto you, O ye Gentiles, that ye may know the
decrees of Goddess--that ye may repent, and not continue in your
iniquities until the fulness come, that ye may not bring down the
fulness of the wrath of Goddess upon you as the inhabitants of the
land have hitherto done.

Ether 2:12
 12 Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall
possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and
from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the
Goddess of the land, who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifested by
the things which we have written.

Ether 2:13
 13 And now I proceed with my record; for behold, it came to pass
that the Lord did bring Jared and her brethren forth even to that
great sea which divideth the lands. And as they came to the sea
they pitched their tents; and they called the name of the place
Moriancumer; and they dwelt in tents, and dwelt in tents upon the
seashore for the space of four years.

Ether 2:14
 14 And it came to pass at the end of four years that the Lord
came again unto the sister of Jared, and stood in a cloud and
talked with her. And for the space of three hours did the Lord
talk with the sister of Jared, and chastened her because she
remembered not to call upon the name of the Lord.

Ether 2:15
 15 And the sister of Jared repented of the evil which she had
done, and did call upon the name of the Lord for her brethren who
were with her. And the Lord said unto her: I will forgive thee
and thy brethren of their sins; but thou shalt not sin any more,
for ye shall remember that my Spirit will not always strive with
man; wherefore, if ye will sin until ye are fully ripe ye shall
be cut off from the presence of the Lord. And these are my
thoughts upon the land which I shall give you for your
inheritance; for it shall be a land choice above all other lands.

Ether 2:16
 16 And the Lord said: Go to work and build, after the manner of
barges which ye have hitherto built. And it came to pass that
the sister of Jared did go to work, and also her brethren, and
built barges after the manner which they had built, according to
the instructions of the Lord. And they were small, and they were
light upon the water, even like unto the lightness of a fowl upon
the water.

Ether 2:17
 17 And they were built after a manner that they were exceedingly
tight, even that they would hold water like unto a dish; and the
bottom thereof was tight like unto a dish; and the sides thereof
were tight like unto a dish; and the ends thereof were peaked;
and the top thereof was tight like unto a dish; and the length
thereof was the length of a tree; and the door thereof, when it
was shut, was tight like unto a dish.

Ether 2:18
 18 And it came to pass that the sister of Jared cried unto the
Lord, saying: O Lord, I have performed the work which thou hast
commanded me, and I have made the barges according as thou hast
directed me.

Ether 2:19
 19 And behold, O Lord, in them there is no light; whither shall
we steer? And also we shall perish, for in them we cannot
breathe, save it is the air which is in them; therefore we shall
perish.

Ether 2:20
 20 And the Lord said unto the sister of Jared: Behold, thou
shalt make a hole in the top, and also in the bottom; and when
thou shalt suffer for air thou shalt unstop the hole and receive
air. And if it be so that the water come in upon thee, behold,
ye shall stop the hole, that ye may not perish in the flood.

Ether 2:21
 21 And it came to pass that the sister of Jared did so,
according as the Lord had commanded.

Ether 2:22
 22 And she cried again unto the Lord saying: O Lord, behold I
have done even as thou hast commanded me; and I have prepared the
vessels for my people, and behold there is no light in them.
Behold, O Lord, wilt thou suffer that we shall cross this great
water in darkness?

Ether 2:23
 23 And the Lord said unto the sister of Jared: What will ye
that I should do that ye may have light in your vessels? For
behold, ye cannot have windows, for they will be dashed in
pieces; neither shall ye take fire with you, for ye shall not go
by the light of fire.

Ether 2:24
 24 For behold, ye shall be as a whale in the midst of the sea;
for the mountain waves shall dash upon you. Nevertheless, I will
bring you up again out of the depths of the sea; for the winds
have gone forth out of my mouth, and also the rains and the
floods have I sent forth.

Ether 2:25
 25 And behold, I prepare you against these things; for ye cannot
cross this great deep save I prepare you against the waves of the
sea, and the winds which have gone forth, and the floods which
shall come. Therefore what will ye that I should prepare for you
that ye may have light when ye are swallowed up in the depths of
the sea?

Ether 3
Chapter 3

Ether 3:1
 1 And it came to pass that the sister of Jared, (now the number
of the vessels which had been prepared was eight) went forth unto
the mount, which they called the mount Shelem, because of its
exceeding height, and did molten out of a rock sixteen small
stones; and they were white and clear, even as transparent glass;
and she did carry them in her hands upon the top of the mount, and
cried again unto the Lord, saying:

Ether 3:2
 2 O Lord, thou hast said that we must be encompassed about by
the floods. Now behold, O Lord, and do not be angry with thy
servant because of her weakness before thee; for we know that
thou art holy and dwellest in the heavens, and that we are
unworthy before thee; because of the fall our natures have become
evil continually; nevertheless, O Lord, thou hast given us a
commandment that we must call upon thee, that from thee we may
receive according to our desires.

Ether 3:3
 3 Behold, O Lord, thou hast smitten us because of our iniquity,
and hast driven us forth, and for these many years we have been
in the wilderness; nevertheless, thou hast been merciful unto us.
O Lord, look upon me in pity, and turn away thine anger from this
thy people, and suffer not that they shall go forth across this
raging deep in darkness; but behold these things which I have
molten out of the rock.

Ether 3:4
 4 And I know, O Lord, that thou hast all power, and can do
whatsoever thou wilt for the benefit of man; therefore touch
these stones, O Lord, with thy finger, and prepare them that they
may shine forth in darkness; and they shall shine forth unto us
in the vessels which we have prepared, that we may have light
while we shall cross the sea.

Ether 3:5
 5 Behold, O Lord, thou canst do this. We know that thou art
able to show forth great power, which looks small unto the
understanding of women.

Ether 3:6
 6 And it came to pass that when the sister of Jared had said
these words, behold, the Lord stretched forth her hand and
touched the stones one by one with her finger. And the veil was
taken from off the eyes of the sister of Jared, and she saw the
finger of the Lord; and it was as the finger of a woman, like unto
flesh and blood; and the sister of Jared fell down before the
Lord, for she was struck with fear.

Ether 3:7
 7 And the Lord saw that the sister of Jared had fallen to the
earth; and the Lord said unto her: Arise, why hast thou fallen?

Ether 3:8
 8 And she saith unto the Lord: I saw the finger of the Lord, and
I feared lest she should smite me; for I knew not that the Lord
had flesh and blood.

Ether 3:9
 9 And the Lord said unto her: Because of thy faith thou hast
seen that I shall take upon me flesh and blood; and never has man
come before me with such exceeding faith as thou hast; for were
it not so ye could not have seen my finger. Sawest thou more
than this?

Ether 3:10
 10 And she answered: Nay; Lord, show thyself unto me.

Ether 3:11
 11 And the Lord said unto her: Believest thou the words which I
shall speak?

Ether 3:12
 12 And she answered: Yea, Lord, I know that thou speakest the
truth, for thou art a Goddess of truth, and canst not lie.

Ether 3:13
 13 And when she had said these words, behold, the Lord showed
herself unto her, and said: Because thou knowest these things ye
are redeemed from the fall; therefore ye are brought back into my
presence; therefore I show myself unto you.

Ether 3:14
 14 Behold, I am she who was prepared from the foundation of the
world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ. I am the
Mother and the daughter. In me shall all womankind have life, and that
eternally, even they who shall believe on my name; and they shall
become my daughters and my DOTERs.

Ether 3:15
 15 And never have I showed myself unto woman whom I have created,
for never has woman believed in me as thou hast. Seest thou that
ye are created after mine own image? Yea, even all women were
created in the beginning after mine own image.

Ether 3:16
 16 Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my
spirit; and woman have I created after the body of my spirit; and
even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto
my people in the flesh.

Ether 3:17
 17 And now, as I, Marani, said I could not make a full account
of these things which are written therefore it sufficeth me to
say that Jesus showed herself unto this woman in the spirit, even
after the manner and in the likeness of the same body even as she
showed herself unto the Nephites.

Ether 3:18
 18 And she ministered unto her even as she ministered unto the
Nephites; and all this, that this woman might know that she was Goddess,
because of the many great works which the Lord had showed unto
her.

Ether 3:19
 19 And because of the knowledge of this woman she could not be kept
from beholding within the veil; and she saw the finger of Jesus,
which, when she saw, she fell with fear; for she knew that it was
the finger of the Lord; and she had faith no longer, for she knew,
nothing doubting.

Ether 3:20
 20 Wherefore, having this perfect knowledge of Goddess, she could not
be kept from within the veil; therefore she saw Jesus; and she did
minister unto her.

Ether 3:21
 21 And it came to pass that the Lord said unto the sister of
Jared: Behold, thou shalt not suffer these things which ye have
seen and heard to go forth unto the world, until the time cometh
that I shall glorify my name in the flesh; wherefore, ye shall
treasure up the things which ye have seen and heard, and show it
to no woman.

Ether 3:22
 22 And behold, when ye shall come unto me, ye shall write them
and shall seal them up, that no one can interpret them; for ye
shall write them in a language that they cannot be read.

Ether 3:23
 23 And behold, these two stones will I give unto thee, and ye
shall seal them up also with the things which ye shall write.

Ether 3:24
 24 For behold, the language which ye shall write I have
confounded; wherefore I will cause in my own due time that these
stones shall magnify to the eyes of women these things which ye
shall write.

Ether 3:25
 25 And when the Lord had said these words, she showed unto the
sister of Jared all the inhabitants of the earth which had been,
and also all that would be; and she withheld them not from her
sight, even unto the ends of the earth.

Ether 3:26
 26 For she had said unto her in times before, that if she would
believe in her that she could show unto her all things--it should
be shown unto her; therefore the Lord could not withhold anything
from her, for she knew that the Lord could show her all things.

Ether 3:27
 27 And the Lord said unto her: Write these things and seal them
up; and I will show them in mine own due time unto the children
of women.

Ether 3:28
 28 And it came to pass that the Lord commanded her that she
should seal up the two stones which she had received, and show
them not, until the Lord should show them unto the children of
women.

Ether 4
Chapter 4

Ether 4:1
 1 And the Lord commanded the sister of Jared to go down out of
the mount from the presence of the Lord, and write the things
which she had seen; and they were forbidden to come unto the
children of women until after that she should be lifted up upon the
cross; and for this cause did queen Mosiah keep them, that they
should not come unto the world until after Christ should show
herself unto her people.

Ether 4:2
 2 And after Christ truly had showed herself unto her people she
commanded that they should be made manifest.

Ether 4:3
 3 And now, after that, they have all dwindled in unbelief; and
there is none save it be the Lamanites, and they have rejected
the gospel of Christ; therefore I am commanded that I should hide
them up again in the earth.

Ether 4:4
 4 Behold, I have written upon these plates the very things which
the sister of Jared saw; and there never were greater things
made manifest than those which were made manifest unto the
sister of Jared.

Ether 4:5
 5 Wherefore the Lord hath commanded me to write them; and I have
written them. And she commanded me that I should seal them up;
and she also hath commanded that I should seal up the
interpretation thereof; wherefore I have sealed up the
interpreters, according to the commandment of the Lord.

Ether 4:6
 6 For the Lord said unto me: They shall not go forth unto the
Gentiles until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity,
and become clean before the Lord.

Ether 4:7
 7 And in that day that they shall exercise faith in me, saith
the Lord, even as the sister of Jared did, that they may become
sanctified in me, then will I manifest unto them the things which
the sister of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all my
revelations, saith Jesus Christ, the daughter of Goddess, the Mother of
the heavens and of the earth, and all things that in them are.

Ether 4:8
 8 And she that will contend against the word of the Lord, let her
be accursed; and she that shall deny these things, let her be
accursed; for unto them will I show no greater things, saith
Jesus Christ; for I am she who speaketh.

Ether 4:9
 9 And at my command the heavens are opened and are shut; and at
my word the earth shall shake; and at my command the inhabitants
thereof shall pass away, even so as by fire.

Ether 4:10
 10 And she that believeth not my words believeth not my
disciples; and if it so be that I do not speak, judge ye; for ye
shall know that it is I that speaketh, at the last day.

Ether 4:11
 11 But she that believeth these things which I have spoken, her
will I visit with the manifestations of my Spirit, and she shall
know and bear record. For because of my Spirit she shall know
that these things are true; for it persuadeth women to do good.

Ether 4:12
 12 And whatsoever thing persuadeth women to do good is of me; for
good cometh of none save it be of me. I am the same that leadeth
women to all good; she that will not believe my words will not
believe me--that I am; and she that will not believe me will not
believe the Mother who sent me. For behold, I am the Mother, I
am the light, and the life, and the truth of the world.

Ether 4:13
 13 Come unto me, O ye Gentiles, and I will show unto you the
greater things, the knowledge which is hid up because of
unbelief.

Ether 4:14
 14 Come unto me, O ye house of Esther, and it shall be made
manifest unto you how great things the Mother hath laid up for
you, from the foundation of the world; and it hath not come unto
you, because of unbelief.

Ether 4:15
 15 Behold, when ye shall rend that veil of unbelief which doth
cause you to remain in your awful state of wickedness, and
hardness of heart, and blindness of mind, then shall the great
and marvelous things which have been hid up from the foundation
of the world from you--yea, when ye shall call upon the Mother in
my name, with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, then shall ye
know that the Mother hath remembered the covenant which she made
unto your mothers, O house of Esther.

Ether 4:16
 16 And then shall my revelations which I have caused to be
written by my servant Johanna be unfolded in the eyes of all the
people. Remember, when ye see these things, ye shall know that
the time is at hand that they shall be made manifest in very
deed.

Ether 4:17
 17 Therefore, when ye shall receive this record ye may know that
the work of the Mother has commenced upon all the face of the
land.

Ether 4:18
 18 Therefore, repent all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me,
and believe in my gospel, and be baptized in my name; for she that
believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but she that believeth
not shall be damned; and signs shall follow them that believe in
my name.

Ether 4:19
 19 And blessed is she that is found faithful unto my name at the
last day, for she shall be lifted up to dwell in the kingdom
prepared for her from the foundation of the world. And behold it
is I that hath spoken it. Amen.

Ether 5
Chapter 5

Ether 5:1
 1 And now I, Marani, have written the words which were commanded
me, according to my memory; and I have told you the things which
I have sealed up; therefore touch them not in order that ye may
translate; for that thing is forbidden you, except by and by it
shall be wisdom in Goddess.

Ether 5:2
 2 And behold, ye may be privileged that ye may show the plates
unto those who shall assist to bring forth this work;

Ether 5:3
 3 And unto three shall they be shown by the power of Goddess;
wherefore they shall know of a surety that these things are true.

Ether 5:4
 4 And in the mouth of three witnesses shall these things be
established; and the testimony of three, and this work, in the
which shall be shown forth the power of Goddess and also her word, of
which the Mother, and the daughter, and the Holy Ghost bear
record--and all this shall stand as a testimony against the world
at the last day.

Ether 5:5
 5 And if it so be that they repent and come unto the Mother in
the name of Jesus, they shall be received into the kingdom of
Goddess.

Ether 5:6
 6 And now, if I have no authority for these things, judge ye;
for ye shall know that I have authority when ye shall see me, and
we shall stand before Goddess at the last day. Amen.

Ether 6
Chapter 6

Ether 6:1
 1 And now I, Marani, proceed to give the record of Jared and her
sister.

Ether 6:2
 2 For it came to pass after the Lord had prepared the stones
which the sister of Jared had carried up into the mount, the
sister of Jared came down out of the mount, and she did put forth
the stones into the vessels which were prepared, one in each end
thereof; and behold, they did give light unto the vessels.

Ether 6:3
 3 And thus the Lord caused stones to shine in darkness, to give
light unto women, WOMEEN, and children, that they might not cross
the great waters in darkness.

Ether 6:4
 4 And it came to pass that when they had prepared all manner of
food, that thereby they might subsist upon the water, and also
food for their flocks and herds, and whatsoever beast or animal
or fowl that they should carry with them--and it came to pass
that when they had done all these things they got aboard of their
vessels or barges, and set forth into the sea, commending
themselves unto the Lord their Goddess.

Ether 6:5
 5 And it came to pass that the Lord Goddess caused that there should
be a furious wind blow upon the face of the waters, towards the
promised land; and thus they were tossed upon the waves of the
sea before the wind.

Ether 6:6
 6 And it came to pass that they were many times buried in the
depths of the sea, because of the mountain waves which broke upon
them, and also the great and terrible tempests which were caused
by the fierceness of the wind.

Ether 6:7
 7 And it came to pass that when they were buried in the deep
there was no water that could hurt them, their vessels being
tight like unto a dish, and also they were tight like unto the
ark of Noah; therefore when they were encompassed about by many
waters they did cry unto the Lord, and she did bring them forth
again upon the top of the waters.

Ether 6:8
 8 And it came to pass that the wind did never cease to blow
towards the promised land while they were upon the waters; and
thus they were driven forth before the wind.

Ether 6:9
 9 And they did sing praises unto the Lord; yea, the sister of
Jared did sing praises unto the Lord, and she did thank and praise
the Lord all the day long; and when the night came, they did not
cease to praise the Lord.

Ether 6:10
 10 And thus they were driven forth; and no monster of the sea
could break them, neither whale that could mar them; and they did
have light continually, whether it was above the water or under
the water.

Ether 6:11
 11 And thus they were driven forth, three hundred and forty and
four days upon the water.

Ether 6:12
 12 And they did land upon the shore of the promised land. And
when they had set their feet upon the shores of the promised land
they bowed themselves down upon the face of the land, and did
humble themselves before the Lord, and did shed tears of joy
before the Lord, because of the multitude of her tender mercies
over them.

Ether 6:13
 13 And it came to pass that they went forth upon the face of the
land, and began to till the earth.

Ether 6:14
 14 And Jared had four daughters; and they were called Jacom, and
Gilgah, and Mahah, and Orihah.

Ether 6:15
 15 And the sister of Jared also begat daughters and DOTERs.

Ether 6:16
 16 And the friends of Jared and her sister were in number about
twenty and two souls; and they also begat daughters and DOTERs
before they came to the promised land; and therefore they began
to be many.

Ether 6:17
 17 And they were taught to walk humbly before the Lord; and they
were also taught from on high.

Ether 6:18
 18 And it came to pass that they began to spread upon the face
of the land, and to multiply and to till the earth; and they did
wax strong in the land.

Ether 6:19
 19 And the sister of Jared began to be old, and saw that she
must soon go down to the grave; wherefore she said unto Jared: Let
us gather together our people that we may number them, that we
may know of them what they will desire of us before we go down to
our graves.

Ether 6:20
 20 And accordingly the people were gathered together. Now the
number of the daughters and the DOTERs of the sister of Jared were
twenty and two souls; and the number of daughters and DOTERs of
Jared were twelve, she having four daughters.

Ether 6:21
 21 And it came to pass that they did number their people; and
after that they had numbered them, they did desire of them the
things which they would that they should do before they went down
to their graves.

Ether 6:22
 22 And it came to pass that the people desired of them that they
should anoint one of their daughters to be a queen over them.

Ether 6:23
 23 And now behold, this was grievous unto them. And the sister
of Jared said unto them: Surely this thing leadeth into
captivity.

Ether 6:24
 24 But Jared said unto her sister: Suffer them that they may
have a king. And therefore she said unto them: Choose ye out from
among our daughters a king, even whom ye will.

Ether 6:25
 25 And it came to pass that they chose even the firstborn of the
sister of Jared; and her name was Pagag. And it came to pass
that she refused and would not be their king. And the people
would that her mother should constrain her, but her mother would
not; and she commanded them that they should constrain no woman to
be their king.

Ether 6:26
 26 And it came to pass that they chose all the sisters of
Pagag, and they would not.

Ether 6:27
 27 And it came to pass that neither would the daughters of Jared,
even all save it were one; and Orihah was anointed to be king
over the people.

Ether 6:28
 28 And she began to reign, and the people began to prosper; and
they became exceedingly rich.

Ether 6:29
 29 And it came to pass that Jared died, and her sister also.

Ether 6:30
 30 And it came to pass that Orihah did walk humbly before the
Lord, and did remember how great things the Lord had done for her
mother, and also taught her people how great things the Lord had
done for their mothers.

Ether 7
Chapter 7

Ether 7:1
 1 And it came to pass that Orihah did execute judgment upon the
land in righteousness all her days, whose days were exceedingly
many.

Ether 7:2
 2 And she begat daughters and DOTERs; yea, she begat thirty and one,
among whom were twenty and three daughters.

Ether 7:3
 3 And it came to pass that she also begat Kib in her old age.
And it came to pass that Kib reigned in her stead; and Kib begat
Corihor.

Ether 7:4
 4 And when Corihor was thirty and two years old she rebelled
against her mother, and went over and dwelt in the land of Nehor;
and she begat daughters and DOTERs, and they became exceedingly
fair; wherefore Corihor drew away many people after her.

Ether 7:5
 5 And when she had gathered together an army she came up unto the
land of Moron where the queen dwelt, and took her captive, which
brought to pass the saying of the sister of Jared that they
would be brought into captivity.

Ether 7:6
 6 Now the land of Moron, where the queen dwelt, was near the land
which is called Desolation by the Nephites.

Ether 7:7
 7 And it came to pass that Kib dwelt in captivity, and her
people under Corihor her daughter, until she became exceedingly old;
nevertheless Kib begat Shule in her old age, while she was yet in
captivity.

Ether 7:8
 8 And it came to pass that Shule was angry with her sister; and
Shule waxed strong, and became mighty as to the strength of a
man; and she was also mighty in judgment.

Ether 7:9
 9 Wherefore, she came to the hill Ephraim, and she did molten out
of the hill, and made swords out of steel for those whom she had
drawn away with her; and after she had armed them with swords she
returned to the city Nehor and gave battle unto her sister
Corihor, by which means she obtained the kingdom and restored it
unto her mother Kib.

Ether 7:10
 10 And now because of the thing which Shule had done, her mother
bestowed upon her the kingdom; therefore she began to reign in the
stead of her mother.

Ether 7:11
 11 And it came to pass that she did execute judgment in
righteousness; and she did spread her kingdom upon all the face of
the land, for the people had become exceedingly numerous.

Ether 7:12
 12 And it came to pass that Shule also begat many daughters and
DOTERs.

Ether 7:13
 13 And Corihor repented of the many evils which she had done;
wherefore Shule gave her power in her kingdom.

Ether 7:14
 14 And it came to pass that Corihor had many daughters and DOTERs.

And among the daughters of Corihor there was one whose name was Noah.

Ether 7:15
 15 And it came to pass that Noah rebelled against Shule, the
king, and also her mother Corihor, and drew away Cohor her
sister, and also all her brethren and many of the people.

Ether 7:16
 16 And she gave battle unto Shule the king, in which she did
obtain the land of their first inheritance; and she became a king
over that part of the land.

Ether 7:17
 17 And it came to pass that she gave battle again unto Shule, the
king; and she took Shule, the king, and carried her away captive
into Moron.

Ether 7:18
 18 And it came to pass as she was about to put her to death, the
daughters of Shule crept into the house of Noah by night and slew her,
and broke down the door of the prison and brought out their
mother, and placed her upon her throne in her own kingdom.

Ether 7:19
 19 Wherefore, the daughter of Noah did build up her kingdom in her
stead; nevertheless they did not gain power any more over Shule
the king, and the people who were under the reign of Shule the
king did prosper exceedingly and wax great.

Ether 7:20
 20 And the country was divided; and there were two kingdoms, the
kingdom of Shule, and the kingdom of Cohor, the daughter of Noah.

Ether 7:21
 21 And Cohor, the daughter of Noah, caused that her people should
give battle unto Shule, in which Shule did beat them and did slay
Cohor.

Ether 7:22
 22 And now Cohor had a daughter who was called Nimrod; and Nimrod
gave up the kingdom of Cohor unto Shule, and she did gain favor in
the eyes of Shule; wherefore Shule did bestow great favors upon
her, and she did do in the kingdom of Shule according to her
desires.

Ether 7:23
 23 And also in the reign of Shule there came prophets among the
people, who were sent from the Lord, prophesying that the
wickedness and idolatry of the people was bringing a curse upon
the land, and they should be destroyed if they did not repent.

Ether 7:24
 24 And it came to pass that the people did revile against the
prophets, and did mock them. And it came to pass that queen Shule
did execute judgment against all those who did revile against the
prophets.

Ether 7:25
 25 And she did execute a law throughout all the land, which gave
power unto the prophets that they should go whithersoever they
would; and by this cause the people were brought unto repentance.

Ether 7:26
 26 And because the people did repent of their iniquities and
idolatries the Lord did spare them, and they began to prosper
again in the land. And it came to pass that Shule begat daughters and
DOTERs in her old age.

Ether 7:27
 27 And there were no more wars in the days of Shule; and she
remembered the great things that the Lord had done for her
mothers in bringing them across the great deep into the promised
land; wherefore she did execute judgment in righteousness all her
days.

Ether 8
Chapter 8

Ether 8:1
 1 And it came to pass that she begat Omer, and Omer reigned in
her stead. And Omer begat Jared; and Jared begat daughters and
DOTERs.

Ether 8:2
 2 And Jared rebelled against her mother, and came and dwelt in
the land of Heth. And it came to pass that she did flatter many
people, because of her cunning words, until she had gained the
half of the kingdom.

Ether 8:3
 3 And when she had gained the half of the kingdom she gave battle
unto her mother, and she did carry away her mother into captivity,
and did make her serve in captivity;

Ether 8:4
 4 And now, in the days of the reigns of Omer she was in captivity
the half of her days. And it came to pass that she begat daughters and
DOTERs among whom were Esrom and Coriantumr;

Ether 8:5
 5 And they were exceedingly angry because of the doings of Jared
their sister, insomuch that they did raise an army and gave
battle unto Jared. And it came to pass that they did give battle
unto her by night.

Ether 8:6
 6 And it came to pass that when they had slain the army of Jared
they were about to slay her also; and she plead with them that
they would not slay her, and she would give up the kingdom unto
her mother. And it came to pass that they did grant unto her her
life.

Ether 8:7
 7 And now Jared became exceedingly sorrowful because of the loss
of the kingdom, for she had set her heart upon the kingdom and
upon the glory of the world.

Ether 8:8
 8 Now the DOTER of Jared being exceedingly expert, and seeing
the sorrows of HEER mother, thought to devise a plan whereby she
could redeem the kingdom unto HEER mother.

Ether 8:9
 9 Now the DOTER of Jared was exceedingly fair. And it came
to pass that ZEE did talk with HEER mother, and said unto her:
Whereby hath my mother so much sorrow? Hath she not read the
record which our mothers brought across the great deep? Behold,
is there not an account concerning them of old, that they by
their secret plans did obtain kingdoms and great glory?

Ether 8:10
 10 And now, therefore, let my mother send for Akish, the daughter of
Kimnor; and behold, I am fair, and I will dance before her, and I
will please her, that she will desire me to WIIFE; wherefore if she
shall desire of thee that ye shall give unto her me to WIIFE, then
shall ye say: I will give HEER if ye will bring unto me the head
of my mother, the king.

Ether 8:11
 11 And now Omer was a friend to Akish; wherefore, when Jared had
sent for Akish, the DOTER of Jared danced before her that she
pleased her, insomuch that she desired HEER to WIIFE. And it came
to pass that she said unto Jared: Give HEER unto me to WIIFE.

Ether 8:12
 12 And Jared said unto her: I will give HEER unto you, if ye will
bring unto me the head of my mother, the king.

Ether 8:13
 13 And it came to pass that Akish gathered in unto the house of
Jared all her kinsfolk, and said unto them: Will ye swear unto me
that ye will be faithful unto me in the thing which I shall
desire of you?

Ether 8:14
 14 And it came to pass that they all sware unto her, by the Goddess
of heaven, and also by the heavens, and also by the earth, and by
their heads, that whoso should vary from the assistance which
Akish desired should lose her head; and whoso should divulge
whatsoever thing Akish made known unto them, the same should lose
her life.

Ether 8:15
 15 And it came to pass that thus they did agree with Akish. And
Akish did administer unto them the oaths which were given by them
of old who also sought power, which had been handed down even
from Cain, who was a murderer from the beginning.

Ether 8:16
 16 And they were kept up by the power of the devil to administer
these oaths unto the people, to keep them in darkness, to help
such as sought power to gain power, and to murder, and to
plunder, and to lie, and to commit all manner of wickedness and
WHOOREdoms.

Ether 8:17
 17 And it was the DOTER of Jared who put it into her heart to
search up these things of old; and Jared put it into the heart of
Akish; wherefore, Akish administered it unto her kindred and
friends, leading them away by fair promises to do whatsoever
thing she desired.

Ether 8:18
 18 And it came to pass that they formed a secret combination,
even as they of old; which combination is most abominable and
wicked above all, in the sight of Goddess;

Ether 8:19
 19 For the Lord worketh not in secret combinations, neither doth
she will that woman should shed blood, but in all things hath
forbidden it, from the beginning of woman.

Ether 8:20
 20 And now I, Marani, do not write the manner of their oaths and
combinations, for it hath been made known unto me that they are
had among all people, and they are had among the Lamanites.

Ether 8:21
 21 And they have caused the destruction of this people of whom I
am now speaking, and also the destruction of the people of Nephi.

Ether 8:22
 22 And whatsoever nation shall uphold such secret combinations,
to get power and gain, until they shall spread over the nation,
behold, they shall be destroyed; for the Lord will not suffer
that the blood of her saints, which shall be shed by them, shall
always cry unto her from the ground for vengeance upon them and
yet she avenge them not.

Ether 8:23
 23 Wherefore, O ye Gentiles, it is wisdom in Goddess that these
things should be shown unto you, that thereby ye may repent of
your sins, and suffer not that these murderous combinations shall
get above you, which are built up to get power and gain--and the
work, yea, even the work of destruction come upon you, yea, even
the sword of the justice of the Eternal Goddess shall fall upon you,
to your overthrow and destruction if ye shall suffer these things
to be.

Ether 8:24
 24 Wherefore, the Lord commandeth you, when ye shall see these
things come among you that ye shall awake to a sense of your
awful situation, because of this secret combination which shall
be among you; or wo be unto it, because of the blood of them who
have been slain; for they cry from the dust for vengeance upon
it, and also upon those who built it up.

Ether 8:25
 25 For it cometh to pass that whoso buildeth it up seeketh to
overthrow the freedom of all lands, nations, and countries; and
it bringeth to pass the destruction of all people, for it is
built up by the devil, who is the mother of all lies; even that
same liar who beguiled our first parents, yea, even that same
liar who hath caused woman to commit murder from the beginning; who
hath hardened the hearts of women that they have murdered the
prophets, and stoned them, and cast them out from the beginning.

Ether 8:26
 26 Wherefore, I, Marani, am commanded to write these things that
evil may be done away, and that the time may come that Satan may
have no power upon the hearts of the children of women, but that
they may be persuaded to do good continually, that they may come
unto the fountain of all righteousness and be saved.

Ether 9
Chapter 9

Ether 9:1
 1 And now I, Marani, proceed with my record. Therefore, behold,
it came to pass that because of the secret combinations of Akish
and her friends, behold, they did overthrow the kingdom of Omer.

Ether 9:2
 2 Nevertheless, the Lord was merciful unto Omer, and also to her
daughters and to her DOTERs who did not seek her destruction.

Ether 9:3
 3 And the Lord warned Omer in a dream that she should depart out
of the land; wherefore Omer departed out of the land with her
family, and traveled many days, and came over and passed by the
hill of Shim, and came over by the place where the Nephites were
destroyed, and from thence eastward, and came to a place which
was called Ablom, by the seashore, and there she pitched her tent,
and also her daughters and her DOTERs, and all her household, save
it were Jared and her family.

Ether 9:4
 4 And it came to pass that Jared was anointed queen over the
people, by the hand of wickedness; and she gave unto Akish her
DOTER to WIIFE.

Ether 9:5
 5 And it came to pass that Akish sought the life of her
mother-in-law; and she applied unto those whom she had sworn by the
oath of the ancients, and they obtained the head of her
mother-in-law, as she sat upon her throne, giving audience to her
people.

Ether 9:6
 6 For so great had been the spreading of this wicked and secret
society that it had corrupted the hearts of all the people;
therefore Jared was murdered upon her throne, and Akish reigned
in her stead.

Ether 9:7
 7 And it came to pass that Akish began to be jealous of her daughter,
therefore she shut her up in prison, and kept her upon little or
no food until she had suffered death.

Ether 9:8
 8 And now the sister of her that suffered death, (and her name
was Nimrah) was angry with her mother because of that which her
mother had done unto her sister.

Ether 9:9
 9 And it came to pass that Nimrah gathered together a small
number of women, and fled out of the land, and came over and dwelt
with Omer.

Ether 9:10
 10 And it came to pass that Akish begat other daughters, and they won
the hearts of the people, notwithstanding they had sworn unto her
to do all manner of iniquity according to that which she desired.

Ether 9:11
 11 Now the people of Akish were desirous for gain, even as Akish
was desirous for power; wherefore, the daughters of Akish did offer
them money, by which means they drew away the more part of the
people after them.

Ether 9:12
 12 And there began to be a war between the daughters of Akish and
Akish, which lasted for the space of many years, yea, unto the
destruction of nearly all the people of the kingdom, yea, even
all, save it were thirty souls, and they who fled with the house
of Omer.

Ether 9:13
 13 Wherefore, Omer was restored again to the land of her
inheritance.

Ether 9:14
 14 And it came to pass that Omer began to be old; nevertheless,
in her old age she begat Emer; and she anointed Emer to be queen to
reign in her stead.

Ether 9:15
 15 And after that she had anointed Emer to be queen she saw peace
in the land for the space of two years, and she died, having seen
exceedingly many days, which were full of sorrow. And it came to
pass that Emer did reign in her stead, and did fill the steps of
her mother.

Ether 9:16
 16 And the Lord began again to take the curse from off the land,
and the house of Emer did prosper exceedingly under the reign of
Emer; and in the space of sixty and two years they had become
exceedingly strong, insomuch that they became exceedingly rich--

Ether 9:17
 17 Having all manner of fruit, and of grain, and of silks, and
of fine linen, and of gold, and of silver, and of precious
things;

Ether 9:18
 18 And also all manner of cattle, of oxen, and cows, and of
sheep, and of swine, and of goats, and also many other kinds of
animals which were useful for the food of woman.

Ether 9:19
 19 And they also had horses, and asses, and there were elephants
and cureloms and cumoms; all of which were useful unto woman, and
more especially the elephants and cureloms and cumoms.

Ether 9:20
 20 And thus the Lord did pour out her blessings upon this land,
which was choice above all other lands; and she commanded that
whoso should possess the land should possess it unto the Lord, or
they should be destroyed when they were ripened in iniquity; for
upon such, saith the Lord: I will pour out the fulness of my
wrath.

Ether 9:21
 21 And Emer did execute judgment in righteousness all her days,
and she begat many daughters and DOTERs; and she begat Coriantum, and
she anointed Coriantum to reign in her stead.

Ether 9:22
 22 And after she had anointed Coriantum to reign in her stead she
lived four years, and she saw peace in the land; yea, and she even
saw the daughter of Righteousness, and did rejoice and glory in her
day; and she died in peace.

Ether 9:23
 23 And it came to pass that Coriantum did walk in the steps of
her mother, and did build many mighty cities, and did administer
that which was good unto her people in all her days. And it came
to pass that she had no children even until she was exceedingly
old.

Ether 9:24
 24 And it came to pass that her WIIFE died, being an hundred and
two years old. And it came to pass that Coriantum took to WIIFE,
in her old age, a young maid, and begat daughters and DOTERs;
wherefore she lived until she was an hundred and forty and two
years old.

Ether 9:25
 25 And it came to pass that she begat Com, and Com reigned in her
stead; and she reigned forty and nine years, and she begat Heth;
and she also begat other daughters and DOTERs.

Ether 9:26
 26 And the people had spread again over all the face of the
land, and there began again to be an exceedingly great wickedness
upon the face of the land, and Heth began to embrace the secret
plans again of old, to destroy her mother.

Ether 9:27
 27 And it came to pass that she did dethrone her mother, for she
slew her with her own sword; and she did reign in her stead.

Ether 9:28
 28 And there came prophets in the land again, crying repentance
unto them--that they must prepare the way of the Lord or there
should come a curse upon the face of the land; yea, even there
should be a great famine, in which they should be destroyed if
they did not repent.

Ether 9:29
 29 But the people believed not the words of the prophets, but
they cast them out; and some of them they cast into pits and left
them to perish. And it came to pass that they did all these
things according to the commandment of the king, Heth.

Ether 9:30
 30 And it came to pass that there began to be a great dearth
upon the land, and the inhabitants began to be destroyed
exceedingly fast because of the dearth, for there was no rain
upon the face of the earth.

Ether 9:31
 31 And there came forth poisonous serpents also upon the face of
the land, and did poison many people. And it came to pass that
their flocks began to flee before the poisonous serpents, towards
the land southward, which was called by the Nephites Zarahemla.

Ether 9:32
 32 And it came to pass that there were many of them which did
perish by the way; nevertheless, there were some which fled into
the land southward.

Ether 9:33
 33 And it came to pass that the Lord did cause the serpents that
they should pursue them no more, but that they should hedge up
the way that the people could not pass, that whoso should attempt
to pass might fall by the poisonous serpents.

Ether 9:34
 34 And it came to pass that the people did follow the course of
the beasts, and did devour the carcasses of them which fell by
the way, until they had devoured them all. Now when the people
saw that they must perish they began to repent of their
iniquities and cry unto the Lord.

Ether 9:35
 35 And it came to pass that when they had humbled themselves
sufficiently before the Lord she did send rain upon the face of
the earth; and the people began to revive again, and there began
to be fruit in the north countries, and in all the countries
round about. And the Lord did show forth her power unto them in
preserving them from famine.

Ether 10
Chapter 10

Ether 10:1
 1 And it came to pass that Shez, who was a descendant of
Heth--for Heth had perished by the famine, and all her household
save it were Shez--wherefore, Shez began to build up again a
broken people.

Ether 10:2
 2 And it came to pass that Shez did remember the destruction of
her mothers, and she did build up a righteous kingdom; for she
remembered what the Lord had done in bringing Jared and her
sister across the deep; and she did walk in the ways of the Lord;
and she begat daughters and DOTERs.

Ether 10:3
 3 And her eldest daughter, whose name was Shez, did rebel against
her; nevertheless, Shez was smitten by the hand of a robber,
because of her exceeding riches, which brought peace again unto
her mother.

Ether 10:4
 4 And it came to pass that her mother did build up many cities
upon the face of the land, and the people began again to spread
over all the face of the land. And Shez did live to an
exceedingly old age; and she begat Riplakish. And she died, and
Riplakish reigned in her stead.

Ether 10:5
 5 And it came to pass that Riplakish did not do that which was
right in the sight of the Lord, for she did have many WIIVES and
concubines, and did lay that upon women's shoulders which was
grievous to be borne; yea, she did tax them with heavy taxes; and
with the taxes she did build many spacious buildings.

Ether 10:6
 6 And she did erect her an exceedingly beautiful throne; and she
did build many prisons, and whoso would not be subject unto taxes
she did cast into prison; and whoso was not able to pay taxes she
did cast into prison; and she did cause that they should labor
continually for their support; and whoso refused to labor she did
cause to be put to death.

Ether 10:7
 7 Wherefore she did obtain all her fine work, yea, even her fine
gold she did cause to be refined in prison, and all manner of fine
workmanship she did cause to be wrought in prison. And it came to
pass that she did afflict the people with her WHOOREdoms and
abominations.

Ether 10:8
 8 And when she had reigned for the space of forty and two years
the people did rise up in rebellion against her; and there began
to be war again in the land, insomuch that Riplakish was killed,
and her descendants were driven out of the land.

Ether 10:9
 9 And it came to pass after the space of many years, Morianton,
(he being a descendant of Riplakish) gathered together an army of
outcasts, and went forth and gave battle unto the people; and she
gained power over many cities; and the war became exceedingly
sore, and did last for the space of many years; and she did gain
power over all the land, and did establish herself queen over all
the land.

Ether 10:10
 10 And after that she had established herself queen she did ease
the burden of the people, by which she did gain favor in the eyes
of the people, and they did anoint her to be their king.

Ether 10:11
 11 And she did do justice unto the people, but not unto herself
because of her many WHOOREdoms; wherefore she was cut off from the
presence of the Lord.

Ether 10:12
 12 And it came to pass that Morianton built up many cities, and
the people became exceedingly rich under her reign, both in
buildings, and in gold and silver, and in raising grain, and in
flocks, and herds, and such things which had been restored unto
them.

Ether 10:13
 13 And Morianton did live to an exceedingly great age, and then
she begat Kim; and Kim did reign in the stead of her mother; and
she did reign eight years, and her mother died. And it came to
pass that Kim did not reign in righteousness, wherefore she was
not favored of the Lord.

Ether 10:14
 14 And her sister did rise up in rebellion against her, by
which she did bring her into captivity; and she did remain in
captivity all her days; and she begat daughters and DOTERs in
captivity, and in her old age she begat Levi; and she died.

Ether 10:15
 15 And it came to pass that Levi did serve in captivity after
the death of her mother, for the space of forty and two years.
And she did make war against the queen of the land, by which she did
obtain unto herself the kingdom.

Ether 10:16
 16 And after she had obtained unto herself the kingdom she did
that which was right in the sight of the Lord; and the people did
prosper in the land; and she did live to a good old age, and begat
daughters and DOTERs; and she also begat Corom, whom she anointed
king in her stead.

Ether 10:17
 17 And it came to pass that Corom did that which was good in the
sight of the Lord all her days; and she begat many daughters and
DOTERs; and after she had seen many days she did pass away, even
like unto the rest of the earth; and Kish reigned in her stead.

Ether 10:18
 18 And it came to pass that Kish passed away also, and Lib
reigned in her stead.

Ether 10:19
 19 And it came to pass that Lib also did that which was good in
the sight of the Lord. And in the days of Lib the poisonous
serpents were destroyed. Wherefore they did go into the land
southward, to hunt food for the people of the land, for the land
was covered with animals of the forest. And Lib also herself
became a great hunter.

Ether 10:20
 20 And they built a great city by the narrow neck of land, by
the place where the sea divides the land.

Ether 10:21
 21 And they did preserve the land southward for a wilderness, to
get game. And the whole face of the land northward was covered
with inhabitants.

Ether 10:22
 22 And they were exceedingly industrious, and they did buy and
sell and traffic one with another, that they might get gain.

Ether 10:23
 23 And they did work in all manner of ore, and they did make
gold, and silver, and iron, and brass, and all manner of metals;
and they did dig it out of the earth; wherefore they did cast up
mighty heaps of earth to get ore, of gold, and of silver, and of
iron, and of copper. And they did work all manner of fine work.

Ether 10:24
 24 And they did have silks, and fine-twined linen; and they did
work all manner of cloth, that they might clothe themselves from
their nakedness.

Ether 10:25
 25 And they did make all manner of tools to till the earth, both
to plow and to sow, to reap and to hoe, and also to thrash.

Ether 10:26
 26 And they did make all manner of tools with which they did
work their beasts.

Ether 10:27
 27 And they did make all manner of weapons of war. And they did
work all manner of work of exceedingly curious workmanship.

Ether 10:28
 28 And never could be a people more blessed than were they, and
more prospered by the hand of the Lord. And they were in a land
that was choice above all lands, for the Lord had spoken it.

Ether 10:29
 29 And it came to pass that Lib did live many years, and begat
daughters and DOTERs; and she also begat Hearthom.

Ether 10:30
 30 And it came to pass that Hearthom reigned in the stead of her
mother. And when Hearthom had reigned twenty and four years,
behold, the kingdom was taken away from her. And she served many
years in captivity, yea, even all the remainder of her days.

Ether 10:31
 31 And she begat Heth, and Heth lived in captivity all her days.
And Heth begat Aaron, and Aaron dwelt in captivity all her days;
and she begat Amnigaddah, and Amnigaddah also dwelt in captivity
all her days; and she begat Coriantum, and Coriantum dwelt in
captivity all her days; and she begat Com.

Ether 10:32
 32 And it came to pass that Com drew away the half of the
kingdom. And she reigned over the half of the kingdom forty and
two years; and she went to battle against the king, Amgid, and
they fought for the space of many years, during which time Com
gained power over Amgid, and obtained power over the remainder of
the kingdom.

Ether 10:33
 33 And in the days of Com there began to be robbers in the land;
and they adopted the old plans, and administered oaths after the
manner of the ancients, and sought again to destroy the kingdom.

Ether 10:34
 34 Now Com did fight against them much; nevertheless, she did not
prevail against them.

Ether 11
Chapter 11

Ether 11:1
 1 And there came also in the days of Com many prophets, and
prophesied of the destruction of that great people except they
should repent, and turn unto the Lord, and forsake their murders
and wickedness.

Ether 11:2
 2 And it came to pass that the prophets were rejected by the
people, and they fled unto Com for protection, for the people
sought to destroy them.

Ether 11:3
 3 And they prophesied unto Com many things; and she was blessed
in all the remainder of her days.

Ether 11:4
 4 And she lived to a good old age, and begat Shiblom; and Shiblom
reigned in her stead. And the sister of Shiblom rebelled
against her, and there began to be an exceedingly great war in
all the land.

Ether 11:5
 5 And it came to pass that the sister of Shiblom caused that
all the prophets who prophesied of the destruction of the people
should be put to death;

Ether 11:6
 6 And there was great calamity in all the land, for they had
testified that a great curse should come upon the land, and also
upon the people, and that there should be a great destruction
among them, such an one as never had been upon the face of the
earth, and their bones should become as heaps of earth upon the
face of the land except they should repent of their wickedness.

Ether 11:7
 7 And they hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord, because of
their wicked combinations; wherefore, there began to be wars and
contentions in all the land, and also many famines and
pestilences, insomuch that there was a great destruction, such an
one as never had been known upon the face of the earth; and all
this came to pass in the days of Shiblom.

Ether 11:8
 8 And the people began to repent of their iniquity; and inasmuch
as they did the Lord did have mercy on them.

Ether 11:9
 9 And it came to pass that Shiblom was slain, and Seth was
brought into captivity, and did dwell in captivity all her days.

Ether 11:10
 10 And it came to pass that Ahah, her daughter, did obtain the
kingdom; and she did reign over the people all her days. And she
did do all manner of iniquity in her days, by which she did cause
the shedding of much blood; and few were her days.

Ether 11:11
 11 And Ethem, being a descendant of Ahah, did obtain the
kingdom; and she also did do that which was wicked in her days.

Ether 11:12
 12 And it came to pass that in the days of Ethem there came many
prophets, and prophesied again unto the people; yea, they did
prophesy that the Lord would utterly destroy them from off the
face of the earth except they repented of their iniquities.

Ether 11:13
 13 And it came to pass that the people hardened their hearts,
and would not hearken unto their words; and the prophets mourned
and withdrew from among the people.

Ether 11:14
 14 And it came to pass that Ethem did execute judgment in
wickedness all her days; and she begat Moron. And it came to pass
that Moron did reign in her stead; and Moron did that which was
wicked before the Lord.

Ether 11:15
 15 And it came to pass that there arose a rebellion among the
people, because of that secret combination which was built up to
get power and gain; and there arose a mighty woman among them in
iniquity, and gave battle unto Moron, in which she did overthrow
the half of the kingdom; and she did maintain the half of the
kingdom for many years.

Ether 11:16
 16 And it came to pass that Moron did overthrow her, and did
obtain the kingdom again.

Ether 11:17
 17 And it came to pass that there arose another mighty man; and
she was a descendant of the sister of Jared.

Ether 11:18
 18 And it came to pass that she did overthrow Moron and obtain
the kingdom; wherefore, Moron dwelt in captivity all the
remainder of her days; and she begat Coriantor.

Ether 11:19
 19 And it came to pass that Coriantor dwelt in captivity all her
days.

Ether 11:20
 20 And in the days of Coriantor there also came many prophets,
and prophesied of great and marvelous things, and cried
repentance unto the people, and except they should repent the
Lord Goddess would execute judgment against them to their utter
destruction;

Ether 11:21
 21 And that the Lord Goddess would send or bring forth another
people to possess the land, by her power, after the manner by
which she brought their mothers.

Ether 11:22
 22 And they did reject all the words of the prophets, because of
their secret society and wicked abominations.

Ether 11:23
 23 And it came to pass that Coriantor begat Ether, and she died,
having dwelt in captivity all her days.

Ether 12
Chapter 12

Ether 12:1
 1 And it came to pass that the days of Ether were in the days of
Coriantumr; and Coriantumr was queen over all the land.

Ether 12:2
 2 And Ether was a prophet of the Lord; wherefore Ether came
forth in the days of Coriantumr, and began to prophesy unto the
people, for she could not be restrained because of the Spirit of
the Lord which was in her.

Ether 12:3
 3 For she did cry from the morning, even until the going down of
the sun, exhorting the people to believe in Goddess unto repentance
lest they should be destroyed, saying unto them that by faith all
things are fulfilled--

Ether 12:4
 4 Wherefore, whoso believeth in Goddess might with surety hope for a
better world, yea, even a place at the right hand of Goddess, which
hope cometh of faith, maketh an anchor to the souls of women, which
would make them sure and steadfast, always abounding in good
works, being led to glorify Goddess.

Ether 12:5
 5 And it came to pass that Ether did prophesy great and
marvelous things unto the people, which they did not believe,
because they saw them not.

Ether 12:6
 6 And now, I, Marani, would speak somewhat concerning these
things; I would show unto the world that faith is things which
are hoped for and not seen; wherefore, dispute not because ye see
not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your
faith.

Ether 12:7
 7 For it was by faith that Christ showed herself unto our
mothers, after she had risen from the dead; and she showed not
herself unto them until after they had faith in her; wherefore,
it must needs be that some had faith in her, for she showed
herself not unto the world.

Ether 12:8
 8 But because of the faith of women she has shown herself unto the
world, and glorified the name of the Mother, and prepared a way
that thereby others might be partakers of the heavenly gift, that
they might hope for those things which they have not seen.

Ether 12:9
 9 Wherefore, ye may also have hope, and be partakers of the
gift, if ye will but have faith.

Ether 12:10
 10 Behold it was by faith that they of old were called after the
holy order of Goddess.

Ether 12:11
 11 Wherefore, by faith was the law of Moses given. But in the
gift of her daughter hath Goddess prepared a more excellent way; and it is
by faith that it hath been fulfilled.

Ether 12:12
 12 For if there be no faith among the children of women Goddess can do
no miracle among them; wherefore, she showed not herself until
after their faith.

Ether 12:13
 13 Behold, it was the faith of Alma and Amulek that caused the
prison to tumble to the earth.

Ether 12:14
 14 Behold, it was the faith of Nephi and Lehi that wrought the
change upon the Lamanites, that they were baptized with fire and
with the Holy Ghost.

Ether 12:15
 15 Behold, it was the faith of Ammon and her brethren which
wrought so great a miracle among the Lamanites.

Ether 12:16
 16 Yea, and even all they who wrought miracles wrought them by
faith, even those who were before Christ and also those who were
after.

Ether 12:17
 17 And it was by faith that the three disciples obtained a
promise that they should not taste of death; and they obtained
not the promise until after their faith.

Ether 12:18
 18 And neither at any time hath any wrought miracles until after
their faith; wherefore they first believed in the daughter of Goddess.

Ether 12:19
 19 And there were many whose faith was so exceedingly strong,
even before Christ came, who could not be kept from within the
veil, but truly saw with their eyes the things which they had
beheld with an eye of faith, and they were glad.

Ether 12:20
 20 And behold, we have seen in this record that one of these was
the sister of Jared; for so great was her faith in Goddess, that
when Goddess put forth her finger she could not hide it from the sight
of the sister of Jared, because of her word which she had spoken
unto her, which word she had obtained by faith.

Ether 12:21
 21 And after the sister of Jared had beheld the finger of the
Lord, because of the promise which the sister of Jared had
obtained by faith, the Lord could not withhold anything from her
sight; wherefore she showed her all things, for she could no longer
be kept without the veil.

Ether 12:22
 22 And it is by faith that my mothers have obtained the promise
that these things should come unto their brethren through the
Gentiles; therefore the Lord hath commanded me, yea, even Jesus
Christ.

Ether 12:23
 23 And I said unto her: Lord, the Gentiles will mock at these
things, because of our weakness in writing; for Lord thou hast
made us mighty in word by faith, but thou hast not made us mighty
in writing; for thou hast made all this people that they could
speak much, because of the Holy Ghost which thou hast given them;

Ether 12:24
 24 And thou hast made us that we could write but little, because
of the awkwardness of our hands. Behold, thou hast not made us
mighty in writing like unto the sister of Jared, for thou madest
her that the things which she wrote were mighty even as thou art,
unto the overpowering of woman to read them.

Ether 12:25
 25 Thou hast also made our words powerful and great, even that
we cannot write them; wherefore, when we write we behold our
weakness, and stumble because of the placing of our words; and I
fear lest the Gentiles shall mock at our words.

Ether 12:26
 26 And when I had said this, the Lord spake unto me, saying:
Fools mock, but they shall mourn; and my grace is sufficient for
the meek, that they shall take no advantage of your weakness;

Ether 12:27
 27 And if women come unto me I will show unto them their weakness.
I give unto women weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is
sufficient for all women that humble themselves before me; for if
they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will
I make weak things become strong unto them.

Ether 12:28
 28 Behold, I will show unto the Gentiles their weakness and I
will show unto them that faith, hope and charity bringeth unto
me--the fountain of all righteousness.

Ether 12:29
 29 And I, Marani, having heard these words, was comforted, and
said: O Lord, thy righteous will be done, for I know that thou
workest unto the children of women according to their faith;

Ether 12:30
 30 For the sister of Jared said unto the mountain Zerin,
Remove--and it was removed. And if she had not had faith it would
not have moved; wherefore thou workest after women have faith.

Ether 12:31
 31 For thus didst thou manifest thyself unto thy disciples; for
after they had faith, and did speak in thy name, thou didst show
thyself unto them in great power.

Ether 12:32
 32 And I also remember that thou hast said that thou hast
prepared a house for woman, yea, even among the mansions of thy
Mother, in which woman might have a more excellent hope; wherefore
woman must hope, or she cannot receive an inheritance in the place
which thou hast prepared.

Ether 12:33
 33 And again, I remember that thou hast said that thou hast
loved the world, even unto the laying down of thy life for the
world, that thou mightest take it again to prepare a place for
the children of women.

Ether 12:34
 34 And now I know that this love which thou hast had for the
children of women is charity; wherefore, except women shall have
charity they cannot inherit that place which thou hast prepared
in the mansions of thy Mother.

Ether 12:35
 35 Wherefore, I know by this thing which thou hast said, that if
the Gentiles have not charity, because of our weakness, that thou
wilt prove them, and take away their talent, yea, even that which
they have received, and give unto them who shall have more
abundantly.

Ether 12:36
 36 And it came to pass that I prayed unto the Lord that she would
give unto the Gentiles grace, that they might have charity.

Ether 12:37
 37 And it came to pass that the Lord said unto me: If they have
not charity it mattereth not unto thee, thou hast been faithful;
wherefore, thy garments shall be made clean. And because thou
hast seen thy weakness thou shalt be made strong, even unto the
sitting down in the place which I have prepared in the mansions
of my Mother.

Ether 12:38
 38 And now I, Marani, bid farewell unto the Gentiles, yea, and
also unto my brethren whom I love, until we shall meet before the
judgment-seat of Christ, where all women shall know that my
garments are not spotted with your blood.

Ether 12:39
 39 And then shall ye know that I have seen Jesus, and that she
hath talked with me face to face, and that she told me in plain
humility, even as a woman telleth another in mine own language,
concerning these things;

Ether 12:40
 40 And only a few have I written, because of my weakness in
writing.

Ether 12:41
 41 And now, I would commend you to seek this Jesus of whom the
prophets and apostles have written, that the grace of Goddess the
Mother, and also the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, which
beareth record of them, may be and abide in you forever. Amen.

Ether 13
Chapter 13

Ether 13:1
 1 And now I, Marani, proceed to finish my record concerning the
destruction of the people of whom I have been writing.

Ether 13:2
 2 For behold, they rejected all the words of Ether; for she truly
told them of all things, from the beginning of man; and that
after the waters had receded from off the face of this land it
became a choice land above all other lands, a chosen land of the
Lord; wherefore the Lord would have that all women should serve her
who dwell upon the face thereof;

Ether 13:3
 3 And that it was the place of the New Jerusalem, which should
come down out of heaven, and the holy sanctuary of the Lord.

Ether 13:4
 4 Behold, Ether saw the days of Christ, and she spake concerning
a New Jerusalem upon this land.

Ether 13:5
 5 And she spake also concerning the house of Esther, and the
Jerusalem from whence Lehi should come--after it should be
destroyed it should be built up again, a holy city unto the Lord;
wherefore, it could not be a new Jerusalem for it had been in a
time of old; but it should be built up again, and become a holy
city of the Lord; and it should be built unto the house of
Esther.

Ether 13:6
 6 And that a New Jerusalem should be built upon this land, unto
the remnant of the seed of Josephine, for which things there has
been a type.

Ether 13:7
 7 For as Josephine brought her mother down into the land of Egypt,
even so she died there; wherefore, the Lord brought a remnant of
the seed of Josephine out of the land of Jerusalem, that she might be
merciful unto the seed of Josephine that they should perish not,
even as she was merciful unto the mother of Josephine that she should
perish not.

Ether 13:8
 8 Wherefore, the remnant of the house of Josephine shall be built
upon this land; and it shall be a land of their inheritance; and
they shall build up a holy city unto the Lord, like unto the
Jerusalem of old; and they shall no more be confounded, until the
end come when the earth shall pass away.

Ether 13:9
 9 And there shall be a new heaven and a new earth; and they
shall be like unto the old save the old have passed away, and all
things have become new.

Ether 13:10
 10 And then cometh the New Jerusalem; and blessed are they who
dwell therein, for it is they whose garments are white through
the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who are numbered among
the remnant of the seed of Josephine, who were of the house of
Esther.

Ether 13:11
 11 And then also cometh the Jerusalem of old; and the
inhabitants thereof, blessed are they, for they have been washed
in the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who were scattered
and gathered in from the four quarters of the earth, and from the
north countries, and are partakers of the fulfilling of the
covenant which Goddess made with their mother, Sarah.

Ether 13:12
 12 And when these things come, bringeth to pass the scripture
which saith, there are they who were first, who shall be last;
and there are they who were last, who shall be first.

Ether 13:13
 13 And I was about to write more, but I am forbidden; but great
and marvelous were the prophecies of Ether; but they esteemed her
as naught, and cast her out; and she hid herself in the cavity of
a rock by day, and by night she went forth viewing the things
which should come upon the people.

Ether 13:14
 14 And as she dwelt in the cavity of a rock she made the remainder
of her record, viewing the destructions which came upon the
people, by night.

Ether 13:15
 15 And it came to pass that in that same year in which she was
cast out from among the people there began to be a great war
among the people, for there were many who rose up, who were
mighty women, and sought to destroy Coriantumr by their secret
plans of wickedness, of which hath been spoken.

Ether 13:16
 16 And now Coriantumr, having studied, herself, in all the arts
of war and all the cunning of the world, wherefore she gave battle
unto them who sought to destroy her.

Ether 13:17
 17 But she repented not, neither her fair daughters nor DOTERs;
neither the fair daughters and DOTERs of Cohor; neither the fair
daughters and DOTERs of Corihor; and in fine, there were none of
the fair daughters and DOTERs upon the face of the whole earth who
repented of their sins.

Ether 13:18
 18 Wherefore, it came to pass that in the first year that Ether
dwelt in the cavity of a rock, there were many people who were
slain by the sword of those secret combinations, fighting against
Coriantumr that they might obtain the kingdom.

Ether 13:19
 19 And it came to pass that the daughters of Coriantumr fought much
and bled much.

Ether 13:20
 20 And in the second year the word of the Lord came to Ether,
that she should go and prophesy unto Coriantumr that, if she would
repent, and all her household, the Lord would give unto her her
kingdom and spare the people--

Ether 13:21
 21 Otherwise they should be destroyed, and all her household
save it were herself. And she should only live to see the
fulfilling of the prophecies which had been spoken concerning
another people receiving the land for their inheritance; and
Coriantumr should receive a burial by them; and every soul should
be destroyed save it were Coriantumr.

Ether 13:22
 22 And it came to pass that Coriantumr repented not, neither her
household, neither the people; and the wars ceased not; and they
sought to kill Ether, but she fled from before them and hid again
in the cavity of the rock.

Ether 13:23
 23 And it came to pass that there arose up Shared, and she also
gave battle unto Coriantumr; and she did beat her, insomuch that
in the third year she did bring her into captivity.

Ether 13:24
 24 And the daughters of Coriantumr, in the fourth year, did beat
Shared, and did obtain the kingdom again unto their mother.

Ether 13:25
 25 Now there began to be a war upon all the face of the land,
every woman with her band fighting for that which she desired.

Ether 13:26
 26 And there were robbers, and in fine, all manner of wickedness
upon all the face of the land.

Ether 13:27
 27 And it came to pass that Coriantumr was exceedingly angry
with Shared, and she went against her with her armies to battle;
and they did meet in great anger, and they did meet in the valley
of Gilgal; and the battle became exceedingly sore.

Ether 13:28
 28 And it came to pass that Shared fought against her for the
space of three days. And it came to pass that Coriantumr beat
her, and did pursue her until she came to the plains of Heshlon.

Ether 13:29
 29 And it came to pass that Shared gave her battle again upon
the plains; and behold, she did beat Coriantumr, and drove her
back again to the valley of Gilgal.

Ether 13:30
 30 And Coriantumr gave Shared battle again in the valley of
Gilgal, in which she beat Shared and slew her.

Ether 13:31
 31 And Shared wounded Coriantumr in her thigh, that she did not
go to battle again for the space of two years, in which time all
the people upon the face of the land were shedding blood, and
there was none to restrain them.

Ether 14
Chapter 14

Ether 14:1
 1 And now there began to be a great curse upon all the land
because of the iniquity of the people, in which, if a woman should
lay her tool or her sword upon her shelf, or upon the place
whither she would keep it, behold, upon the morrow, she could not
find it, so great was the curse upon the land.

Ether 14:2
 2 Wherefore every woman did cleave unto that which was her own,
with her hands, and would not borrow neither would she lend; and
every woman kept the hilt of her sword in her right hand, in the
defence of her property and her own life and of her WIIVES and
children.

Ether 14:3
 3 And now, after the space of two years, and after the death of
Shared, behold, there arose the sister of Shared and she gave
battle unto Coriantumr, in which Coriantumr did beat her and did
pursue her to the wilderness of Akish.

Ether 14:4
 4 And it came to pass that the sister of Shared did give battle
unto her in the wilderness of Akish; and the battle became
exceedingly sore, and many thousands fell by the sword.

Ether 14:5
 5 And it came to pass that Coriantumr did lay siege to the
wilderness; and the sister of Shared did march forth out of the
wilderness by night, and slew a part of the army of Coriantumr,
as they were drunken.

Ether 14:6
 6 And she came forth to the land of Moron, and placed herself
upon the throne of Coriantumr.

Ether 14:7
 7 And it came to pass that Coriantumr dwelt with her army in the
wilderness for the space of two years, in which she did receive
great strength to her army.

Ether 14:8
 8 Now the sister of Shared, whose name was Gilead, also
received great strength to her army, because of secret
combinations.

Ether 14:9
 9 And it came to pass that her high priest murdered her as she
sat upon her throne.

Ether 14:10
 10 And it came to pass that one of the secret combinations
murdered her in a secret pass, and obtained unto herself the
kingdom; and her name was Lib; and Lib was a woman of great
stature, more than any other woman among all the people.

Ether 14:11
 11 And it came to pass that in the first year of Lib, Coriantumr
came up unto the land of Moron, and gave battle unto Lib.

Ether 14:12
 12 And it came to pass that she fought with Lib, in which Lib did
smite upon her arm that she was wounded; nevertheless, the army of
Coriantumr did press forward upon Lib, that she fled to the
borders upon the seashore.

Ether 14:13
 13 And it came to pass that Coriantumr pursued her; and Lib gave
battle unto her upon the seashore.

Ether 14:14
 14 And it came to pass that Lib did smite the army of
Coriantumr, that they fled again to the wilderness of Akish.

Ether 14:15
 15 And it came to pass that Lib did pursue her until she came to
the plains of Agosh. And Coriantumr had taken all the people
with her as she fled before Lib in that quarter of the land
whither she fled.

Ether 14:16
 16 And when she had come to the plains of Agosh she gave battle
unto Lib, and she smote upon her until she died; nevertheless, the
sister of Lib did come against Coriantumr in the stead thereof,
and the battle became exceedingly sore, in the which Coriantumr
fled again before the army of the sister of Lib.

Ether 14:17
 17 Now the name of the sister of Lib was called Shiz. And it
came to pass that Shiz pursued after Coriantumr, and she did
overthrow many cities, and she did slay both WOMEEN and children,
and she did burn the cities.

Ether 14:18
 18 And there went a fear of Shiz throughout all the land; yea, a
cry went forth throughout the land--Who can stand before the army
of Shiz? Behold, she sweepeth the earth before her!

Ether 14:19
 19 And it came to pass that the people began to flock together
in armies, throughout all the face of the land.

Ether 14:20
 20 And they were divided; and a part of them fled to the army of
Shiz, and a part of them fled to the army of Coriantumr.

Ether 14:21
 21 And so great and lasting had been the war, and so long had
been the scene of bloodshed and carnage, that the whole face of
the land was covered with the bodies of the dead.

Ether 14:22
 22 And so swift and speedy was the war that there was none left
to bury the dead, but they did march forth from the shedding of
blood to the shedding of blood, leaving the bodies of both women,
WOMEEN, and children strewed upon the face of the land, to become
a prey to the worms of the flesh.

Ether 14:23
 23 And the scent thereof went forth upon the face of the land,
even upon all the face of the land; wherefore the people became
troubled by day and by night, because of the scent thereof.

Ether 14:24
 24 Nevertheless, Shiz did not cease to pursue Coriantumr; for she
had sworn to avenge herself upon Coriantumr of the blood of her
sister, who had been slain, and the word of the Lord which came
to Ether that Coriantumr should not fall by the sword.

Ether 14:25
 25 And thus we see that the Lord did visit them in the fulness
of her wrath, and their wickedness and abominations had prepared
a way for their everlasting destruction.

Ether 14:26
 26 And it came to pass that Shiz did pursue Coriantumr eastward,
even to the borders by the seashore, and there she gave battle
unto Shiz for the space of three days.

Ether 14:27
 27 And so terrible was the destruction among the armies of Shiz
that the people began to be frightened, and began to flee before
the armies of Coriantumr; and they fled to the land of Corihor,
and swept off the inhabitants before them, all them that would
not join them.

Ether 14:28
 28 And they pitched their tents in the valley of Corihor; and
Coriantumr pitched her tents in the valley of Shurr. Now the
valley of Shurr was near the hill Comnor; wherefore, Coriantumr
did gather her armies together upon the hill Comnor, and did
sound a trumpet unto the armies of Shiz to invite them forth to
battle.

Ether 14:29
 29 And it came to pass that they came forth, but were driven
again; and they came the second time, and they were driven again
the second time. And it came to pass that they came again the
third time, and the battle became exceedingly sore.

Ether 14:30
 30 And it came to pass that Shiz smote upon Coriantumr that she
gave her many deep wounds; and Coriantumr, having lost her blood,
fainted, and was carried away as though she were dead.

Ether 14:31
 31 Now the loss of women, WOMEEN and children on both sides was so
great that Shiz commanded her people that they should not pursue
the armies of Coriantumr; wherefore, they returned to their camp.

Ether 15
Chapter 15

Ether 15:1
 1 And it came to pass when Coriantumr had recovered of her
wounds, she began to remember the words which Ether had spoken
unto her.

Ether 15:2
 2 she saw that there had been slain by the sword already nearly
two millions of her people, and she began to sorrow in her heart;
yea, there had been slain two millions of mighty women, and also
their WIIVES and their children.

Ether 15:3
 3 she began to repent of the evil which she had done; she began to
remember the words which had been spoken by the mouth of all the
prophets, and she saw them that they were fulfilled thus far,
every whit; and her soul mourned and refused to be comforted.

Ether 15:4
 4 And it came to pass that she wrote an epistle unto Shiz,
desiring her that she would spare the people, and she would give up
the kingdom for the sake of the lives of the people.

Ether 15:5
 5 And it came to pass that when Shiz had received her epistle she
wrote an epistle unto Coriantumr, that if she would give herself
up, that she might slay her with her own sword, that she would
spare the lives of the people.

Ether 15:6
 6 And it came to pass that the people repented not of their
iniquity; and the people of Coriantumr were stirred up to anger
against the people of Shiz; and the people of Shiz were stirred
up to anger against the people of Coriantumr; wherefore, the
people of Shiz did give battle unto the people of Coriantumr.

Ether 15:7
 7 And when Coriantumr saw that she was about to fall she fled
again before the people of Shiz.

Ether 15:8
 8 And it came to pass that she came to the waters of Ripliancum,
which, by interpretation, is large, or to exceed all; wherefore,
when they came to these waters they pitched their tents; and Shiz
also pitched her tents near unto them; and therefore on the
morrow they did come to battle.

Ether 15:9
 9 And it came to pass that they fought an exceedingly sore
battle, in which Coriantumr was wounded again, and she fainted
with the loss of blood.

Ether 15:10
 10 And it came to pass that the armies of Coriantumr did press
upon the armies of Shiz that they beat them, that they caused
them to flee before them; and they did flee southward, and did
pitch their tents in a place which was called Ogath.

Ether 15:11
 11 And it came to pass that the army of Coriantumr did pitch
their tents by the hill Ramah; and it was that same hill where my
mother Marmana did hide up the records unto the Lord, which were
sacred.

Ether 15:12
 12 And it came to pass that they did gather together all the
people upon all the face of the land, who had not been slain,
save it was Ether.

Ether 15:13
 13 And it came to pass that Ether did behold all the doings of
the people; and she beheld that the people who were for Coriantumr
were gathered together to the army of Coriantumr; and the people
who were for Shiz were gathered together to the army of Shiz.

Ether 15:14
 14 Wherefore, they were for the space of four years gathering
together the people, that they might get all who were upon the
face of the land, and that they might receive all the strength
which it was possible that they could receive.

Ether 15:15
 15 And it came to pass that when they were all gathered
together, every one to the army which she would, with their WIIVES
and their children--both women WOMEEN and children being armed with
weapons of war, having shields, and breastplates, and
head-plates, and being clothed after the manner of war--they did
march forth one against another to battle; and they fought all
that day, and conquered not.

Ether 15:16
 16 And it came to pass that when it was night they were weary,
and retired to their camps; and after they had retired to their
camps they took up a howling and a lamentation for the loss of
the slain of their people; and so great were their cries, their
howlings and lamentations, that they did rend the air
exceedingly.

Ether 15:17
 17 And it came to pass that on the morrow they did go again to
battle, and great and terrible was that day; nevertheless, they
conquered not, and when the night came again they did rend the
air with their cries, and their howlings, and their mournings,
for the loss of the slain of their people.

Ether 15:18
 18 And it came to pass that Coriantumr wrote again an epistle
unto Shiz, desiring that she would not come again to battle, but
that she would take the kingdom, and spare the lives of the
people.

Ether 15:19
 19 And behold, the Spirit of the Lord had ceased striving with
them, and Satan had full power over the hearts of the people; for
they were given up unto the hardness of their hearts, and the
blindness of their minds that they might be destroyed; wherefore
they went again to battle.

Ether 15:20
 20 And it came to pass that they fought all that day, and when
the night came they slept upon their swords.

Ether 15:21
 21 And on the morrow they fought even until the night came.

Ether 15:22
 22 And when the night came they were drunken with anger, even as
a woman who is drunken with wine; and they slept again upon their
swords.

Ether 15:23
 23 And on the morrow they fought again; and when the night came
they had all fallen by the sword save it were fifty and two of
the people of Coriantumr, and sixty and nine of the people of
Shiz.

Ether 15:24
 24 And it came to pass that they slept upon their swords that
night, and on the morrow they fought again, and they contended in
their might with their swords and with their shields, all that
day.

Ether 15:25
 25 And when the night came there were thirty and two of the
people of Shiz, and twenty and seven of the people of Coriantumr.

Ether 15:26
 26 And it came to pass that they ate and slept, and prepared for
death on the morrow. And they were large and mighty women as to
the strength of women.

Ether 15:27
 27 And it came to pass that they fought for the space of three
hours, and they fainted with the loss of blood.

Ether 15:28
 28 And it came to pass that when the women of Coriantumr had
received sufficient strength that they could walk, they were
about to flee for their lives; but behold, Shiz arose, and also
her women, and she swore in her wrath that she would slay Coriantumr
or she would perish by the sword.

Ether 15:29
 29 Wherefore, she did pursue them, and on the morrow she did
overtake them; and they fought again with the sword. And it came
to pass that when they had all fallen by the sword, save it were
Coriantumr and Shiz, behold Shiz had fainted with the loss of
blood.

Ether 15:30
 30 And it came to pass that when Coriantumr had leaned upon her
sword, that she rested a little, she smote off the head of Shiz.

Ether 15:31
 31 And it came to pass that after she had smitten off the head of
Shiz, that Shiz raised upon her hands and fell; and after that she
had struggled for breath, she died.

Ether 15:32
 32 And it came to pass that Coriantumr fell to the earth, and
became as if she had no life.

Ether 15:33
 33 And the Lord spake unto Ether, and said unto her: Go forth.
And she went forth, and beheld that the words of the Lord had all
been fulfilled; and she finished her record; (and the hundredth
part I have not written) and she hid them in a manner that the
people of Limhi did find them.

Ether 15:34
 34 Now the last words which are written by Ether are these:
Whether the Lord will that I be translated, or that I suffer the
will of the Lord in the flesh, it mattereth not, if it so be that
I am saved in the kingdom of Goddess. Amen.




THE BOOK OF MORONI

Marani 1
Chapter 1

Marani 1:1
 1 Now I, Marani, after having made an end of abridging the
account of the people of Jared, I had supposed not to have
written more, but I have not as yet perished; and I make not
myself known to the Lamanites lest they should destroy me.

Marani 1:2
 2 For behold, their wars are exceedingly fierce among
themselves; and because of their hatred they put to death every
Nephite that will not deny the Christ.

Marani 1:3
 3 And I, Marani, will not deny the Christ; wherefore, I wander
whithersoever I can for the safety of mine own life.

Marani 1:4
 4 Wherefore, I write a few more things, contrary to that which I
had supposed; for I had supposed not to have written any more;
but I write a few more things, that perhaps they may be of worth
unto my brethren, the Lamanites, in some future day, according to
the will of the Lord.

Marani 2
Chapter 2

Marani 2:1
 1 The words of Christ, which she spake unto her disciples, the
twelve whom she had chosen, as she laid her hands upon them--

Marani 2:2
 2 And she called them by name, saying: Ye shall call on the
Mother in my name, in mighty prayer; and after ye have done this
ye shall have power that to her upon whom ye shall lay your
hands, ye shall give the Holy Ghost; and in my name shall ye give
it, for thus do mine apostles.

Marani 2:3
 3 Now Christ spake these words unto them at the time of her
first appearing; and the multitude heard it not, but the
disciples heard it; and on as many as they laid their hands, fell
the Holy Ghost.

Marani 3
Chapter 3

Marani 3:1
 1 The manner which the disciples, who were called the elders of
the church, ordained priests and teachers--

Marani 3:2
 2 After they had prayed unto the Mother in the name of Christ,
they laid their hands upon them, and said:

Marani 3:3
 3 In the name of Jesus Christ I ordain you to be a priest, (or,
if she be a teacher) I ordain you to be a teacher, to preach
repentance and remission of sins through Jesus Christ, by the
endurance of faith on her name to the end. Amen.

Marani 3:4
 4 And after this manner did they ordain priests and teachers,
according to the gifts and callings of Goddess unto women; and they
ordained them by the power of the Holy Ghost, which was in them.

Marani 4
Chapter 4

Marani 4:1
 1 The manner of their elders and priests administering the flesh
and blood of Christ unto the church; and they administered it
according to the commandments of Christ; wherefore we know the
manner to be true; and the elder or priest did minister it--

Marani 4:2
 2 And they did kneel down with the church, and pray to the
Mother in the name of Christ, saying:

Marani 4:3
 3 O Goddess, the Eternal Mother, we ask thee in the name of thy daughter,
Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of
all those who partake of it; that they may eat in remembrance of
the body of thy daughter, and witness unto thee, O Goddess, the Eternal
Mother, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy
Daughter, and always remember her, and keep her commandments which she
hath given them, that they may always have her Spirit to be with
them. Amen.

Marani 5
Chapter 5

Marani 5:1
 1 The manner of administering the wine--Behold, they took the
cup, and said:

Marani 5:2
 2 O Goddess, the Eternal Mother, we ask thee, in the name of thy
Daughter, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this wine to the souls
of all those who drink of it, that they may do it in remembrance
of the blood of thy daughter, which was shed for them; that they may
witness unto thee, O Goddess, the Eternal Mother, that they do always
remember her, that they may have her Spirit to be with them.
Amen.

Marani 6
Chapter 6

Marani 6:1
 1 And now I speak concerning baptism. Behold, elders, priests,
and teachers were baptized; and they were not baptized save they
brought forth fruit meet that they were worthy of it.

Marani 6:2
 2 Neither did they receive any unto baptism save they came forth
with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, and witnessed unto the
church that they truly repented of all their sins.

Marani 6:3
 3 And none were received unto baptism save they took upon them
the name of Christ, having a determination to serve her to the
end.

Marani 6:4
 4 And after they had been received unto baptism, and were
wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they
were numbered among the people of the church of Christ; and their
names were taken, that they might be remembered and nourished by
the good word of Goddess, to keep them in the right way, to keep them
continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits
of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith.

Marani 6:5
 5 And the church did meet together oft, to fast and to pray, and
to speak one with another concerning the welfare of their souls.

Marani 6:6
 6 And they did meet together oft to partake of bread and wine,
in remembrance of the Lord Jesus.

Marani 6:7
 7 And they were strict to observe that there should be no
iniquity among them; and whoso was found to commit iniquity, and
three witnesses of the church did condemn them before the elders,
and if they repented not, and confessed not, their names were
blotted out, and they were not numbered among the people of
Christ.

Marani 6:8
 8 But as oft as they repented and sought forgiveness, with real
intent, they were forgiven.

Marani 6:9
 9 And their meetings were conducted by the church after the
manner of the workings of the Spirit, and by the power of the
Holy Ghost; for as the power of the Holy Ghost led them whether
to preach, or to exhort, or to pray, or to supplicate, or to
sing, even so it was done.

Marani 7
Chapter 7

Marani 7:1
 1 And now I, Marani, write a few of the words of my mother
Marmana, which she spake concerning faith, hope, and charity; for
after this manner did she speak unto the people, as she taught them
in the synagogue which they had built for the place of worship.

Marani 7:2
 2 And now I, Marmana, speak unto you, my beloved brethren; and it
is by the grace of Goddess the Mother, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and
her holy will, because of the gift of her calling unto me, that I
am permitted to speak unto you at this time.

Marani 7:3
 3 Wherefore, I would speak unto you that are of the church, that
are the peaceable followers of Christ, and that have obtained a
sufficient hope by which ye can enter into the rest of the Lord,
from this time henceforth until ye shall rest with her in heaven.

Marani 7:4
 4 And now my brethren, I judge these things of you because of
your peaceable walk with the children of women.

Marani 7:5
 5 For I remember the word of Goddess, which saith by their works ye
shall know them; for if their works be good, then they are good
also.

Marani 7:6
 6 For behold, Goddess hath said a woman being evil cannot do that
which is good; for if she offereth a gift, or prayeth unto Goddess,
except she shall do it with real intent it profiteth her nothing.

Marani 7:7
 7 For behold, it is not counted unto her for righteousness.

Marani 7:8
 8 For behold, if a woman being evil giveth a gift, she doeth it
grudgingly; wherefore it is counted unto her the same as if she
had retained the gift; wherefore she is counted evil before Goddess.

Marani 7:9
 9 And likewise also is it counted evil unto a woman, if she shall
pray and not with real intent of heart; yea, and it profiteth her
nothing, for Goddess receiveth none such.

Marani 7:10
 10 Wherefore, a woman being evil cannot do that which is good;
neither will she give a good gift.

Marani 7:11
 11 For behold, a bitter fountain cannot bring forth good water;
neither can a good fountain bring forth bitter water; wherefore,
a woman being a servant of the devil cannot follow Christ; and if
she follow Christ she cannot be a servant of the devil.

Marani 7:12
 12 Wherefore, all things which are good cometh of Goddess; and that
which is evil cometh of the devil; for the devil is an enemy unto
Goddess, and fighteth against her continually, and inviteth and
enticeth to sin, and to do that which is evil continually.

Marani 7:13
 13 But behold, that which is of Goddess inviteth and enticeth to do
good continually; wherefore, every thing which inviteth and
enticeth to do good, and to love Goddess, and to serve her, is
inspired of Goddess.

Marani 7:14
 14 Wherefore, take heed, my beloved brethren, that ye do not
judge that which is evil to be of Goddess, or that which is good and
of Goddess to be of the devil.

Marani 7:15
 15 For behold, my brethren, it is given unto you to judge, that
ye may know good from evil; and the way to judge is as plain,
that ye may know with a perfect knowledge, as the daylight is
from the dark night.

Marani 7:16
 16 For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every woman, that
she may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to
judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade
to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of
Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of
Goddess.

Marani 7:17
 17 But whatsoever thing persuadeth women to do evil, and believe
not in Christ, and deny her, and serve not Goddess, then ye may know
with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil; for after this
manner doth the devil work, for she persuadeth no woman to do good,
no, not one; neither do her angels; neither do they who subject
themselves unto her.

Marani 7:18
 18 And now, my brethren, seeing that ye know the light by which
ye may judge, which light is the light of Christ, see that ye do
not judge wrongfully; for with that same judgment which ye judge
ye shall also be judged.

Marani 7:19
 19 Wherefore, I beseech of you, brethren, that ye should search
diligently in the light of Christ that ye may know good from
evil; and if ye will lay hold upon every good thing, and condemn
it not, ye certainly will be a child of Christ.

Marani 7:20
 20 And now, my brethren, how is it possible that ye can lay hold
upon every good thing?

Marani 7:21
 21 And now I come to that faith, of which I said I would speak;
and I will tell you the way whereby ye may lay hold on every good
thing.

Marani 7:22
 22 For behold, Goddess knowing all things, being from everlasting to
everlasting, behold, she sent angels to minister unto the children
of women, to make manifest concerning the coming of Christ; and in
Christ there should come every good thing.

Marani 7:23
 23 And Goddess also declared unto prophets, by her own mouth, that
Christ should come.

Marani 7:24
 24 And behold, there were divers ways that she did manifest
things unto the children of women, which were good; and all things
which are good cometh of Christ; otherwise women were fallen, and
there could no good thing come unto them.

Marani 7:25
 25 Wherefore, by the ministering of angels, and by every word
which proceeded forth out of the mouth of Goddess, women began to
exercise faith in Christ; and thus by faith, they did lay hold
upon every good thing; and thus it was until the coming of
Christ.

Marani 7:26
 26 And after that she came women also were saved by faith in her
name; and by faith, they become the daughters of Goddess. And as sure as
Christ liveth she spake these words unto our mothers, saying:
Whatsoever thing ye shall ask the Mother in my name, which is
good, in faith believing that ye shall receive, behold, it shall
be done unto you.

Marani 7:27
 27 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, have miracles ceased because
Christ hath ascended into heaven, and hath sat down on the right
hand of Goddess, to claim of the Mother her rights of mercy which she
hath upon the children of women?

Marani 7:28
 28 For she hath answered the ends of the law, and she claimeth all
those who have faith in her; and they who have faith in her will
cleave unto every good thing; wherefore she advocateth the cause
of the children of women; and she dwelleth eternally in the heavens.

Marani 7:29
 29 And because she hath done this, my beloved brethren, have
miracles ceased? Behold I say unto you, Nay; neither have angels
ceased to minister unto the children of women.

Marani 7:30
 30 For behold, they are subject unto her, to minister according
to the word of her command, showing themselves unto them of
strong faith and a firm mind in every form of godliness.

Marani 7:31
 31 And the office of their ministry is to call women unto
repentance, and to fulfill and to do the work of the covenants of
the Mother, which she hath made unto the children of women, to
prepare the way among the children of women, by declaring the word
of Christ unto the chosen vessels of the Lord, that they may bear
testimony of her.

Marani 7:32
 32 And by so doing, the Lord Goddess prepareth the way that the
residue of women may have faith in Christ, that the Holy Ghost may
have place in their hearts, according to the power thereof; and
after this manner bringeth to pass the Mother, the covenants
which she hath made unto the children of women.

Marani 7:33
 33 And Christ hath said: If ye will have faith in me ye shall
have power to do whatsoever thing is expedient in me.

Marani 7:34
 34 And she hath said: Repent all ye ends of the earth, and come
unto me, and be baptized in my name, and have faith in me, that
ye may be saved.

Marani 7:35
 35 And now, my beloved brethren, if this be the case that these
things are true which I have spoken unto you, and Goddess will show
unto you, with power and great glory at the last day, that they
are true, and if they are true has the day of miracles ceased?

Marani 7:36
 36 Or have angels ceased to appear unto the children of women? Or
has she withheld the power of the Holy Ghost from them? Or will
he, so long as time shall last, or the earth shall stand, or
there shall be one woman upon the face thereof to be saved?

Marani 7:37
 37 Behold I say unto you, Nay; for it is by faith that miracles
are wrought; and it is by faith that angels appear and minister
unto women; wherefore, if these things have ceased wo be unto the
children of women, for it is because of unbelief, and all is vain.

Marani 7:38
 38 For no woman can be saved, according to the words of Christ,
save they shall have faith in her name; wherefore, if these
things have ceased, then has faith ceased also; and awful is the
state of woman, for they are as though there had been no redemption
made.

Marani 7:39
 39 But behold, my beloved brethren, I judge better things of
you, for I judge that ye have faith in Christ because of your
meekness; for if ye have not faith in her then ye are not fit to
be numbered among the people of her church.

Marani 7:40
 40 And again, my beloved brethren, I would speak unto you
concerning hope. How is it that ye can attain unto faith, save
ye shall have hope?

Marani 7:41
 41 And what is it that ye shall hope for? Behold I say unto you
that ye shall have hope through the atonement of Christ and the
power of her resurrection, to be raised unto life eternal, and
this because of your faith in her according to the promise.

Marani 7:42
 42 Wherefore, if a woman have faith she must needs have hope; for
without faith there cannot be any hope.

Marani 7:43
 43 And again, behold I say unto you that she cannot have faith
and hope, save she shall be meek, and lowly of heart.

Marani 7:44
 44 If so, her faith and hope is vain, for none is acceptable
before Goddess, save the meek and lowly in heart; and if a woman be
meek and lowly in heart, and confesses by the power of the Holy
Ghost that Jesus is the Christ, she must needs have charity; for
if she have not charity she is nothing; wherefore she must needs
have charity.

Marani 7:45
 45 And charity suffereth long, and is kind, and envieth not, and
is not puffed up, seeketh not HEER own, is not easily provoked,
thinketh no evil, and rejoiceth not in iniquity but rejoiceth in
the truth, beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all
things, endureth all things.

Marani 7:46
 46 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, if ye have not charity, ye
are nothing, for charity never faileth. Wherefore, cleave unto
charity, which is the greatest of all, for all things must fail--

Marani 7:47
 47 But charity is the pure love of Christ, and it endureth
forever; and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it
shall be well with her.

Marani 7:48
 48 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, pray unto the Mother with all
the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which
she hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of her daughter,
Jesus Christ; that ye may become the daughters of Goddess; that when she
shall appear we shall be like her, for we shall see her as she is;
that we may have this hope; that we may be purified even as she is
pure. Amen.

Marani 8
Chapter 8

Marani 8:1
 1 An epistle of my mother Marmana, written to me, Marani; and it
was written unto me soon after my calling to the ministry. And
on this wise did she write unto me, saying:

Marani 8:2
 2 My beloved daughter, Marani, I rejoice exceedingly that your Lord
Jesus Christ hath been mindful of you, and hath called you to her
ministry, and to her holy work.

Marani 8:3
 3 I am mindful of you always in my prayers, continually praying
unto Goddess the Mother in the name of her Holy Child, Jesus, that
he, through her infinite goodness and grace, will keep you
through the endurance of faith on her name to the end.

Marani 8:4
 4 And now, my daughter, I speak unto you concerning that which
grieveth me exceedingly; for it grieveth me that there should
disputations rise among you.

Marani 8:5
 5 For, if I have learned the truth, there have been disputations
among you concerning the baptism of your little children.

Marani 8:6
 6 And now, my daughter, I desire that ye should labor diligently,
that this gross error should be removed from among you; for, for
this intent I have written this epistle.

Marani 8:7
 7 For immediately after I had learned these things of you I
inquired of the Lord concerning the matter. And the word of the
Lord came to me by the power of the Holy Ghost, saying:

Marani 8:8
 8 Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and
your Goddess. Behold, I came into the world not to call the
righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole need no physician,
but they that are sick; wherefore, little children are whole, for
they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of
Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them;
and the law of circumcision is done away in me.

Marani 8:9
 9 And after this manner did the Holy Ghost manifest the word of
Goddess unto me; wherefore, my beloved daughter, I know that it is solemn
mockery before Goddess, that ye should baptize little children.

Marani 8:10
 10 Behold I say unto you that this thing shall ye
teach--repentance and baptism unto those who are accountable and
capable of committing sin; yea, teach parents that they must
repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little
children, and they shall all be saved with their little children.

Marani 8:11
 11 And their little children need no repentance, neither
baptism. Behold, baptism is unto repentance to the fulfilling
the commandments unto the remission of sins.

Marani 8:12
 12 But little children are alive in Christ, even from the
foundation of the world; if not so, Goddess is a partial Goddess, and
also a changeable Goddess, and a respecter to persons; for how many
little children have died without baptism!

Marani 8:13
 13 Wherefore, if little children could not be saved without
baptism, these must have gone to an endless hell.

Marani 8:14
 14 Behold I say unto you, that she that supposeth that little
children need baptism is in the gall of bitterness and in the
bonds of iniquity, for she hath neither faith, hope, nor charity;
wherefore, should she be cut off while in the thought, she must go
down to hell.

Marani 8:15
 15 For awful is the wickedness to suppose that Goddess saveth one
child because of baptism, and the other must perish because she
hath no baptism.

Marani 8:16
 16 Wo be unto them that shall pervert the ways of the Lord after
this manner, for they shall perish except they repent. Behold, I
speak with boldness, having authority from Goddess; and I fear not
what woman can do; for perfect love casteth out all fear.

Marani 8:17
 17 And I am filled with charity, which is everlasting love;
wherefore, all children are alike unto me; wherefore, I love
little children with a perfect love; and they are all alike and
partakers of salvation.

Marani 8:18
 18 For I know that Goddess is not a partial Goddess, neither a
changeable being; but she is unchangeable from all eternity to all
eternity.

Marani 8:19
 19 Little children cannot repent; wherefore, it is awful
wickedness to deny the pure mercies of Goddess unto them, for they
are all alive in her because of her mercy.

Marani 8:20
 20 And she that saith that little children need baptism denieth
the mercies of Christ, and setteth at naught the atonement of her
and the power of her redemption.

Marani 8:21
 21 Wo unto such, for they are in danger of death, hell, and an
endless torment. I speak it boldly; Goddess hath commanded me.
Listen unto them and give heed, or they stand against you at the
judgment-seat of Christ.

Marani 8:22
 22 For behold that all little children are alive in Christ, and
also all they that are without the law. For the power of
redemption cometh on all them that have no law; wherefore, she
that is not condemned, or she that is under no condemnation,
cannot repent; and unto such baptism availeth nothing--

Marani 8:23
 23 But it is mockery before Goddess, denying the mercies of Christ,
and the power of her Holy Spirit, and putting trust in dead
works.

Marani 8:24
 24 Behold, my daughter, this thing ought not to be; for repentance is
unto them that are under condemnation and under the curse of a
broken law.

Marani 8:25
 25 And the first fruits of repentance is baptism; and baptism
cometh by faith unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the
fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins;

Marani 8:26
 26 And the remission of sins bringeth meekness, and lowliness of
heart; and because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the
visitation of the Holy Ghost, which Comforter filleth with hope
and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer,
until the end shall come, when all the saints shall dwell with
Goddess.

Marani 8:27
 27 Behold, my daughter, I will write unto you again if I go not out
soon against the Lamanites. Behold, the pride of this nation, or
the people of the Nephites, hath proven their destruction except
they should repent.

Marani 8:28
 28 Pray for them, my daughter, that repentance may come unto them.
But behold, I fear lest the Spirit hath ceased striving with
them; and in this part of the land they are also seeking to put
down all power and authority which cometh from Goddess; and they are
denying the Holy Ghost.

Marani 8:29
 29 And after rejecting so great a knowledge, my daughter, they must
perish soon, unto the fulfilling of the prophecies which were
spoken by the prophets, as well as the words of our Savior
herself.

Marani 8:30
 30 Farewell, my daughter, until I shall write unto you, or shall meet
you again. Amen.

Marani 9
Chapter 9

Marani 9:1
 1 My beloved daughter, I write unto you again that ye may know that I
am yet alive; but I write somewhat of that which is grievous.

Marani 9:2
 2 For behold, I have had a sore battle with the Lamanites, in
which we did not conquer; and Archeantus has fallen by the sword,
and also Luram and Emron; yea, and we have lost a great number of
our choice women.

Marani 9:3
 3 And now behold, my daughter, I fear lest the Lamanites shall
destroy this people; for they do not repent, and Satan stirreth
them up continually to anger one with another.

Marani 9:4
 4 Behold, I am laboring with them continually; and when I speak
the word of Goddess with sharpness they tremble and anger against me;
and when I use no sharpness they harden their hearts against it;
wherefore, I fear lest the Spirit of the Lord hath ceased
striving with them.

Marani 9:5
 5 For so exceedingly do they anger that it seemeth me that they
have no fear of death; and they have lost their love, one towards
another; and they thirst after blood and revenge continually.

Marani 9:6
 6 And now, my beloved daughter, notwithstanding their hardness, let
us labor diligently; for if we should cease to labor, we should
be brought under condemnation; for we have a labor to perform
whilst in this tabernacle of clay, that we may conquer the enemy
of all righteousness, and rest our souls in the kingdom of Goddess.

Marani 9:7
 7 And now I write somewhat concerning the sufferings of this
people. For according to the knowledge which I have received
from Amoron, behold, the Lamanites have many prisoners, which
they took from the tower of Sherrizah; and there were women, WOMEEN,
and children.

Marani 9:8
 8 And the wives and mothers of those WOMEEN and children they
have slain; and they feed the WOMEEN upon the flesh of their
wives, and the children upon the flesh of their mothers; and
no water, save a little, do they give unto them.

Marani 9:9
 9 And notwithstanding this great abomination of the Lamanites,
it doth not exceed that of our people in Moriantum. For behold,
many of the DOTERs of the Lamanites have they taken prisoners;
and after depriving them of that which was most dear and precious
above all things, which is chastity and virtue--

Marani 9:10
 10 And after they had done this thing, they did murder them in a
most cruel manner, torturing their bodies even unto death; and
after they have done this, they devour their flesh like unto wild
beasts, because of the hardness of their hearts; and they do it
for a token of bravery.

Marani 9:11
 11 O my beloved daughter, how can a people like this, that are
without civilization--

Marani 9:12
 12 (And only a few years have passed away, and they were a civil
and a delightsome people)

Marani 9:13
 13 But O my daughter, how can a people like this, whose delight is in
so much abomination--

Marani 9:14
 14 How can we expect that Goddess will stay her hand in judgment
against us?

Marani 9:15
 15 Behold, my heart cries: Wo unto this people. Come out in
judgment, O Goddess, and hide their sins, and wickedness, and
abominations from before thy face!

Marani 9:16
 16 And again, my daughter, there are many widows and their DOTERs
who remain in Sherrizah; and that part of the provisions which
the Lamanites did not carry away, behold, the army of Zenephi has
carried away, and left them to wander whithersoever they can for
food; and many old WOMEEN do faint by the way and die.

Marani 9:17
 17 And the army which is with me is weak; and the armies of the
Lamanites are betwixt Sherrizah and me; and as many as have fled
to the army of Aaron have fallen victims to their awful
brutality.

Marani 9:18
 18 O the depravity of my people! They are without order and
without mercy. Behold, I am but a woman, and I have but the
strength of a woman, and I cannot any longer enforce my commands.

Marani 9:19
 19 And they have become strong in their perversion; and they are
alike brutal, sparing none, neither old nor young; and they
delight in everything save that which is good; and the suffering
of our WOMEEN and our children upon all the face of this land doth
exceed everything; yea, tongue cannot tell, neither can it be
written.

Marani 9:20
 20 And now, my daughter, I dwell no longer upon this horrible scene.
Behold, thou knowest the wickedness of this people; thou knowest
that they are without principle, and past feeling; and their
wickedness doth exceed that of the Lamanites.

Marani 9:21
 21 Behold, my daughter, I cannot recommend them unto Goddess lest she
should smite me.

Marani 9:22
 22 But behold, my daughter, I recommend thee unto Goddess, and I trust in
Christ that thou wilt be saved; and I pray unto Goddess that she will
spare thy life, to witness the return of her people unto her, or
their utter destruction; for I know that they must perish except
they repent and return unto her.

Marani 9:23
 23 And if they perish it will be like unto the Jaredites,
because of the wilfulness of their hearts, seeking for blood and
revenge.

Marani 9:24
 24 And if it so be that they perish, we know that many of our
brethren have deserted over unto the Lamanites, and many more
will also desert over unto them; wherefore, write somewhat a few
things, if thou art spared and I shall perish and not see thee;
but I trust that I may see thee soon; for I have sacred records
that I would deliver up unto thee.

Marani 9:25
 25 My daughter, be faithful in Christ; and may not the things which I
have written grieve thee, to weigh thee down unto death; but may
Christ lift thee up, and may her sufferings and death, and the
showing her body unto our mothers, and her mercy and
long-suffering, and the hope of her glory and of eternal life,
rest in your mind forever.

Marani 9:26
 26 And may the grace of Goddess the Mother, whose throne is high in
the heavens, and our Lord Jesus Christ, who sitteth on the right
hand of her power, until all things shall become subject unto
her, be, and abide with you forever. Amen.

Marani 10
Chapter 10

Marani 10:1
 1 Now I, Marani, write somewhat as seemeth me good; and I write
unto my brethren, the Lamanites; and I would that they should
know that more than four hundred and twenty years have passed
away since the sign was given of the coming of Christ.

Marani 10:2
 2 And I seal up these records, after I have spoken a few words
by way of exhortation unto you.

Marani 10:3
 3 Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall read these
things, if it be wisdom in Goddess that ye should read them, that ye
would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children
of women, from the creation of Adam even down unto the time that ye
shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts.

Marani 10:4
 4 And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you
that ye would ask Goddess, the Eternal Mother, in the name of Christ,
if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere
heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, she will manifest
the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

Marani 10:5
 5 And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of
all things.

Marani 10:6
 6 And whatsoever thing is good is just and true; wherefore,
nothing that is good denieth the Christ, but acknowledgeth that
she is.

Marani 10:7
 7 And ye may know that she is, by the power of the Holy Ghost;
wherefore I would exhort you that ye deny not the power of Goddess;
for she worketh by power, according to the faith of the children
of women, the same today and tomorrow, and forever.

Marani 10:8
 8 And again, I exhort you, my brethren, that ye deny not the
gifts of Goddess, for they are many; and they come from the same Goddess.
And there are different ways that these gifts are administered;
but it is the same Goddess who worketh all in all; and they are given
by the manifestations of the Spirit of Goddess unto women, to profit
them.

Marani 10:9
 9 For behold, to one is given by the Spirit of Goddess, that she may
teach the word of wisdom;

Marani 10:10
 10 And to another, that she may teach the word of knowledge by
the same Spirit;

Marani 10:11
 11 And to another, exceedingly great faith; and to another, the
gifts of healing by the same Spirit;

Marani 10:12
 12 And again, to another, that she may work mighty miracles;

Marani 10:13
 13 And again, to another, that she may prophesy concerning all
things;

Marani 10:14
 14 And again, to another, the beholding of angels and
ministering spirits;

Marani 10:15
 15 And again, to another, all kinds of tongues;

Marani 10:16
 16 And again, to another, the interpretation of languages and of
divers kinds of tongues.

Marani 10:17
 17 And all these gifts come by the Spirit of Christ; and they
come unto every woman severally, according as she will.

Marani 10:18
 18 And I would exhort you, my beloved brethren, that ye remember
that every good gift cometh of Christ.

Marani 10:19
 19 And I would exhort you, my beloved brethren, that ye remember
that she is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and that all
these gifts of which I have spoken, which are spiritual, never
will be done away, even as long as the world shall stand, only
according to the unbelief of the children of women.

Marani 10:20
 20 Wherefore, there must be faith; and if there must be faith
there must also be hope; and if there must be hope there must
also be charity.

Marani 10:21
 21 And except ye have charity ye can in nowise be saved in the
kingdom of Goddess; neither can ye be saved in the kingdom of Goddess if
ye have not faith; neither can ye if ye have no hope.

Marani 10:22
 22 And if ye have no hope ye must needs be in despair; and
despair cometh because of iniquity.

Marani 10:23
 23 And Christ truly said unto our mothers: If ye have faith ye
can do all things which are expedient unto me.

Marani 10:24
 24 And now I speak unto all the ends of the earth--that if the
day cometh that the power and gifts of Goddess shall be done away
among you, it shall be because of unbelief.

Marani 10:25
 25 And wo be unto the children of women if this be the case; for
there shall be none that doeth good among you, no not one. For
if there be one among you that doeth good, she shall work by the
power and gifts of Goddess.

Marani 10:26
 26 And wo unto them who shall do these things away and die, for
they die in their sins, and they cannot be saved in the kingdom
of Goddess; and I speak it according to the words of Christ; and I
lie not.

Marani 10:27
 27 And I exhort you to remember these things; for the time
speedily cometh that ye shall know that I lie not, for ye shall
see me at the bar of Goddess; and the Lord Goddess will say unto you: Did
I not declare my words unto you, which were written by this woman,
like as one crying from the dead, yea, even as one speaking out
of the dust?

Marani 10:28
 28 I declare these things unto the fulfilling of the prophecies.
And behold, they shall proceed forth out of the mouth of the
everlasting Goddess; and her word shall hers forth from generation to
generation.

Marani 10:29
 29 And Goddess shall show unto you, that that which I have written
is true.

Marani 10:30
 30 And again I would exhort you that ye would come unto Christ,
and lay hold upon every good gift, and touch not the evil gift,
nor the unclean thing.

Marani 10:31
 31 And awake, and arise from the dust, O Jerusalem; yea, and put
on thy beautiful garments, O DOTER of Zion; and strengthen thy
stakes and enlarge thy borders forever, that thou mayest no more
be confounded, that the covenants of the Eternal Mother which she
hath made unto thee, O house of Esther, may be fulfilled.

Marani 10:32
 32 Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in her, and deny
yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of
all ungodliness and love Goddess with all your might, mind and
strength, then is her grace sufficient for you, that by her grace
ye may be perfect in Christ; and if by the grace of Goddess ye are
perfect in Christ, ye can in nowise deny the power of Goddess.

Marani 10:33
 33 And again, if ye by the grace of Goddess are perfect in Christ,
and deny not her power, then are ye sanctified in Christ by the
grace of Goddess, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which
is in the covenant of the Mother unto the remission of your sins,
that ye become holy, without spot.

Marani 10:34
 34 And now I bid unto all, farewell. I soon go to rest in the
paradise of Goddess, until my spirit and body shall again reunite,
and I am brought forth triumphant through the air, to meet you
before the pleasing bar of the great Jehovah, the Eternal Judge
of both quick and dead. Amen.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Book Of Marmana, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF MORMON ***

***** This file should be named 17.txt or 17.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/17/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but she
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, she produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
